Glucose metabolism and serotonin receptors in the frontotemporal lobe degeneration.

In patients with the frontal variant of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (fv-FTLD), behavioral abnormalities may vary from apathy with motor slowness (apathetic form) to disinhibition with agitation (disinhibited form). These clinical presentations may be related to specific regional cerebral dysfunction and to deficit in the serotoninergic system. We studied cerebral glucose uptake using (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose and positron emission tomography in 18 patients fulfilling clinical criteria for fv-FTLD and showing, respectively, an apathetic or disinhibited behavioral syndrome. In eight of these patients, we also evaluated the 5-hydroxytryptamine-2A receptor cerebral receptor distribution with [(11)C]MDL and positron emission tomography. We found a reduction of frontal glucose metabolism in the whole group of fv-FTLD patients. Apathetic syndrome was associated with a prevalent dorsolateral and frontal medial hypometabolism, whereas the disinhibited syndrome demonstrated a selective hypometabolism in interconnected limbic structures (the cingulate cortex, hippocampus/amygdala, and accumbens nucleus). The in vivo measurements of [(11)C]MDL indicated a significant reduction of 5-hydroxytryptamine-2A receptors in orbitofrontal, frontal medial, and cingulate cortices. These (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography changes can be considered as specific functional markers of the different behavioral presentations in fv-FTLD. The serotoninergic system dysfunction provides a rationale for therapeutic trials with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.

Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is characterized by a relatively selective degeneration of frontal, temporal, or both cortical areas.1 The incidence in a geographically defined population has been estimated to be 81 in 100,000 people, which is not different from that of presenile Alzheimer's disease (AD) in the same sample.2

Clinically, FTLD may be heralded by either an early and progressive change in personality or a progressive language impairment.3 According to widely accepted diagnostic criteria, three different clinical syndromes are delineated: the frontal variant (fv-FTLD) characterized by prevalent behavioral symptoms, with early change in personality and difficulty in modulating behavior, often resulting in inappropriate responses and activities; semantic dementia, associated with prevalent semantic/cognitive impairment; and progressive aphasia, characterized by early nonfluent aphasia.3

Structural neuroimaging can detect cerebral atrophy that occurs as a consequence of the underlying pathological processes. Faster spread of atrophy rates was observed in FTLD patients compared with AD patients, together with regional differences in brain atrophy between frontal and temporal variants.4 In addition, specific patterns of localization of neuropathological and neuroradiological changes have been associated with specific clinical manifestations.5-7 Voxel-based, automated analysis of atrophy confirmed the pattern of anterior temporal atrophy in semantic dementia and dorsolateral frontal atrophy in the fv-FTLD.8, 9

The differential diagnosis from AD is unreliable by National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Diseases and Stroke/Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association criteria.10 Improved reliability may be achieved by means of clinical features11 and neuropsychological tests.12 Memory disorder and even dementia are not paramount as early symptoms of FTLD; therefore, at least in the early stages, this syndrome has to be differentiated from psychiatric disorders more than from other types of dementia.

In the fv-FTLD, it is possible to identify two opposite behavioral syndromes. Apathy, psychomotor inhibition, lack of emotional reactions, and defective social functioning characterize the more common “apathetic” behavior, whereas impulsiveness, perseverations, disinhibition, and lack of concern for others are associated with the less common “disinhibited” behavior.13

Reduced cerebral perfusion and glucose metabolism in the frontotemporal region is the main functional feature in patients with FTLD.14, 15 This functional aspect is different with AD, in which a bilateral temporal and parietal hypometabolism is considered the typical 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) pattern.16 A recent multicentric clinical and PET study in a large series of FTLD patients showed that hypometabolism in frontal ventral polar areas is an early marker of the disease,15 whereas hypometabolism in the retrosplenial/posterior cingulate cortex is an early marker for AD.17

In vivo human data about the role of the 5-hydroxytryptamine-2A (5-HT2A) receptor dysfunction in late-life neurological disorders are limited. A selective degeneration of the 5-HT system, particularly of the 5-HT2A receptors, has been linked to mood and cognitive features of AD.18, 19 In particular, a reduction of the specific binding to 5-HT receptors has been shown in vivo with PET in selected brain areas of moderately to severely affected AD patients.20 An age-related decrease of 5-HT2A receptors also has been described in vivo using PET and different 5-HT2A receptor ligands.21

Although the serotoninergic system is important for behavioral modulation, being tightly bound to the function of prefrontal cortex,22 only a few in vitro reports have focused on the serotoninergic system in FTLD. A marked decline in the number of neurons in the nucleus centralis superior and nucleus raphe dorsalis, but not in the locus ceruleus, was found in postmortem brains of FTLD patients. This suggests that the serotoninergic raphe nuclei, with their ascending projections to the forebrain, are directly or indirectly involved.23 Another in vitro postmortem study reported a significant loss of serotoninergic receptors in the frontal and temporal cortices of FTLD patients and in the temporal and parietal cortices of AD patients.24

This study had two primary goals: (1) to test the hypothesis that different behavioral aspects in fv-FTLD are caused by degeneration of selective frontal areas, which is reflected in different patterns of brain glucose hypometabolism; and (2) to measure cerebral 5-HT2A receptor densities in the same patients in the early phase of the disease, using PET and [11C]MDL100,907, because no in vivo data about this receptor subtype are available in the fv-FTLD.

Subjects and Methods

The protocol for this study was approved by the local ethical committee.

Patients

Patients were selected from a series of consecutive patients evaluated for suspected dementia. All patients met the diagnostic research criteria for FTLD3 and clinically showed the fv-FTLD, as defined by Perry and Hodges.13 Subjects were excluded if they had a history of known or suspected cerebral ischemic event, alcohol abuse, head injury, other major medical illness, or depression.

A total of 18 fv-FTLD patients (12 men and 6 women; all right-handed; mean age, 66 years; mean education, 9 years [range, 2-18]) participated in the study. Signs or symptoms of their disease appeared 6 to 72 months (mean, 28 months; median, 22 months) before this evaluation.

All patients underwent computed tomography scans or magnetic resonance imaging of the brain, and their disease severity ranged from 1 to 3 according to a clinical classification.25

The Hamilton Depression Scale26 and the Neuropsychiatric Inventory27 evaluated depression and behavioral disorders. Instrumental activities of daily living also were assessed.28 A clinical follow-up for at least 24 months, always confirming the diagnosis of fv-FTLD, was available for all patients.

Twelve patients (six men and six women) showed apathetic behavioral patterns, and six patients (all men) demonstrated disinhibited behavioral patterns. The diagnosis of apathetic or disinhibited behavior was made blindly by two neurologists (M.F., M.Z) and by a neuropsychologist (O.P.) from history, informant reports, and clinical observations. There was a complete agreement among the three observers in the assignment of all patients in the two categories. The apathetic behavioral syndrome was characterized by executive deficits (planning, concentration, and abstract reasoning), ideomotor slowness, apathy and indifference, lack of drive and emotional reactivity, and poor language output. The disinhibited behavioral syndrome was characterized by mild executive deficits (planning, concentration, and abstract reasoning), relentlessness, disinhibited behavior, emotional lability, lack of concern for others, impulsiveness, perseveration, and utilization behavior. Table 1 summarizes demographical and clinical features of apathetic and disinhibited fv-FTLD patients.

Neuropsychological Assessment

All patients underwent a neuropsychological test battery aimed at assessing the following cognitive domains: episodic memory (recall and recognition), short-term memory, attention and executive functions, language, and visuospatial function. Because of reduced cooperation and concentration deficits, or technical problems, it was not possible to administer the whole neuropsychological battery to some patients.

The Mini-Mental State Examination29 is a global measure of dementia severity. The California Verbal Learning Test,30 Story Recall test, and Word Learning31 test were used to assess verbal recall and verbal learning. The recall of Rey's Complex Figure32 tested visual long-term memory. The digit span forward and reverse test33 evaluated short-term memory. A visual search of numbers task34 and the Trail Making Test A35 tested attention and concentration of the patients. To test divided attention, we used the Trail Making Test B,35 which also measured visuomotor planning. Raven's Colored Progressive Matrices36 tested abstract reasoning. Language ability was tested with both semantic and phonological verbal fluency, as well as with the Token Test.34 The immediate reproduction of Rey's Complex Figure32 and the Constructional Apraxia test34 examined visuospatial competence, as well as planning and perceptual organization. The Street's test34 measured visual and perceptual abilities.

18F-fluorodeoxyglucose Positron Emission Tomography Data Acquisition

All data were acquired using a GE Advance PET scanner (GE-Advance; General Electric Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI). We used 18FDG and PET to study the 18 fv-FTLD patients and 24 age-matched healthy control subjects (10 men and 14 women; mean age, 61 years; mean schooling, 15 years; mean Mini-Mental State Examination score 29/30) in resting state, with eyes closed and ears unplugged, after intravenous injection of 185 to 296 MBq. A transmission scan lasting 10 minutes was started 40 minutes after tracer injection and was followed by a three-dimensional (3D) static emission scan that lasted 15 minutes. Images were reconstructed using the 3D-Re-Projection algorithm and a Hanning transaxial filter with a cutoff of 4 mm, a ramp axial filter with a cutoff of 8.5 mm, and a field of view of 250 mm, and correcting for attenuation was measured by transmission scan, scatter, decay, and geometry, as implemented in the software applications of GE-Advance.

[11C]MDL100,907 Positron Emission Tomography Data Acquisition

The in vivo expression of 5-HT2A receptors was performed using [11C]MDL100,907 as a tracer. This tracer was considered because its selectivity for the 5-HT2A receptor subtype and its high levels of specific binding in vitro and in vivo.37 [11C]MDL100,907 was synthesized using the described chemical procedures.38, 39

All [11C]MDL100,907 studies were acquired using a GE-Advance 3D PET scanner. Eight of 18 fv-FTLD patients and 6 healthy volunteers were recruited for these studies. Five of the patients were apathetic, three were disinhibited, and none of the patients was depressed (the Hamilton Depression Scale scores: mean, 4.6 ± 2.39; range, 1-8). The subjects were positioned in the PET gantry with their head immobilized, and a 10-minute transmission scan was conducted. The 3D dynamic emission scans started with the intravenous tracer injection of 19 to 37 MBq [11C]MDL100,907 (5 ml in 10 seconds) and lasted for 60 minutes (four 1-minute, three 2-minute, four 5-minute, and six 10-minute scans). Images were reconstructed using the 3D-RP algorithm, a Hanning transaxial filter with a cutoff of 5 mm and a Hanning axial filter with a cutoff of 8.5 mm, a field of view of 320 mm, and correcting for attenuation was measured by scatter, decay, and geometry, as implemented in the software applications of GE-Advance.

Positron Emission Tomography Data Analysis and Statistics

Statistical Parametric Mapping 2 (SPM2; Wellcome, Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK) implemented in MATLAB version 6.5 (Mathworks, Sherborn, MA) running on SUN UltraSparc60 (Sun Microsystems, Inc., Palo Alto, CA) and on Intel Pentium4 (Intel Corporation, Santa Clara, CA) workstations was used for image preprocessing (spatial normalization to a 18FDG PET reference template in the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) standard stereotactic space and gaussian smoothing with a 3D kernel of 8 × 8 × 8 mm full-width at half-maximum) and for voxel-by-voxel Statistical Parametric Mapping40 of 18FDG radioactivity concentration images or of [11C]MDL parametric binding images.

Global differences in the distribution of the tracer's uptake and the age and education effect on it were considered as confounding covariates and were covaried out for all voxels; in addition, we used the disease duration as a covariate of no interest in the comparisons. Comparisons across the different groups were made using t statistics with appropriate linear contrasts.41 The statistical threshold was set at p < 0.001 and p < 0.01 for direct comparisons.

The following statistical comparisons were performed on 18FDG images: (1) the main effect of the whole fv-FTLD group compared with the healthy control subjects; (2) direct comparisons between the two groups and the healthy control subjects (apathetic fv-FTLD patients vs control group; disinhibited fv-FTLD patients vs control group); (3) direct comparisons between apathetic and disinhibited groups (apathetic vs disinhibited patients; disinhibited vs apathetic patients); and (4) correlation analyses between disease duration and metabolic values in the whole group and in the subgroups separately.

Calculation of [11C]MDL100,907 Positron Emission Tomography Binding Images

To measure the in vivo binding of [11C]MDL100,907 to 5-HT2A receptors, we used a semiquantitative method. This method allows the calculation of images of binding potential by dividing pixel-by-pixel radioactivity concentration images collected between 60 and 90 minutes after injection for the mean radioactivity concentration sampled in cerebellum. This region was selected as a reference region because its concentration of 5-HT2A receptors is low or negligible.37 In addition, we failed to find any difference in cerebellar radioactivity concentration between healthy subjects and patients.

We used Statistical Parametric Mapping 2 (SPM2) procedures to assess differences of the distribution density of 5-HT2A receptors in a comparison between eight patients in the FTLD group and six healthy control subjects. The statistical threshold was set at p < 0.001.

Results

Clinical and Neuropsychological Results

Table 1 shows that apathetic patients were older (68 vs 61 years), less educated (8 vs 12 years of schooling), and more severely affected in instrumental activities of daily living (15 vs 10) than disinhibited patients.

In our sample of fv-FTLD patients, the ratio of men to women was 2:1; all disinhibited patients were men. A greater prevalence of FTLD in men has been reported previously2; in particular, in the disinhibited group, FTLD has been ascribed to sex- and culture-related effects.12 As expected, Hamilton Depression Scale scores and specific Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) subitems defined clear-cut behavioral patterns in the apathetic and disinhibited patient groups.

Table 2 shows the neuropsychological results in the two groups of fv-FTLD patients. Apathetic patients were more cognitively impaired than disinhibited patients. In addition, 33% of the former versus 20% of the latter group had a Mini-Mental State Examination score less than 24. All fv-FTLD patients were impaired in verbal memory, as evaluated by the California Verbal Learning Test. Language, attention, and executive functions were more often impaired in apathetic than in disinhibited patients. Notably, there also was a pattern of relatively mild impairment in tests that have been shown to be sensitive to frontal lobe dysfunction, as reported previously.12

18F-fluorodeoxyglucose Positron Emission Tomography Results

Compared with the control group, the whole FTLD group showed a reduced 18FDG uptake bilaterally, in the orbitofrontal cortex, frontal polar cortex, frontal medial cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, dorsolateral frontal cortex, lateral inferior frontal cortex, temporal medial cortex, basal ganglia, and thalamus (Fig 1).

Regional cerebral glucose metabolism: statistical t map of the 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in the whole frontal variant of frontotemporal lobar degeneration patient group compared with healthy control subjects. Significant (p < 0.001) hypometabolic areas are shown in blue. The color bar shows the correspondence with t-score values.

Considering separately the two fv-FTLD groups in comparison with normal control subjects, we found distinctive metabolic patterns (Fig 2). In particular, the apathetic patient group showed a selective reduction of 18FDG uptake bilaterally in the frontal medial cortex, frontal polar cortex, dorsolateral frontal cortex, and insula. In addition, an anterior component of the orbital frontal cortex and thalamus also was involved (see Table 3 and Fig 2A). The distinctive reduction of 18FDG uptake in the disinhibited patient group involved bilaterally the posterior orbitofrontal cortex, the anterior cingulate gyrus, the inferior temporal cortex and the hippocampus/amygdala complex, and the accumbens nucleus. The insula, as well as the thalamus, bilaterally were also hypometabolic, as shown comparably in the apathetic patient group (see Table 3 and Fig 2B). Results are reported in MNI spatial coordinates.

Regional cerebral glucose metabolism: statistical t maps in axial, sagittal, and coronal slices reporting the 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18FDG) uptake in the two patient groups compared with normal controls (NC). Significant (p < 0.001) hypometabolic areas are in blue. (A) Apathetic patients versus NC. (B) Disinhibited patients versus NC. Gray lines show levels of cuts for the sagittal and coronal slices shown below. The bar illustrates the correspondence of t-score values and colors. Note the differential sites of reduced 18FDG uptake: bilateral hypometabolism in the frontal medial and dorsolateral frontal cortices in apathetic patients; and bilateral hypometabolism in the inferior and medial temporal cortex (hippocampus/amygdala structures), thalamus, and ventral striatum in disinhibited patients.

The direct comparisons between groups confirmed these different functional patterns showing a prevalent dorsolateral frontal involvement in the apathetic patient group and hypometabolism in a series of interconnected limbic structures in the disinhibited patient group (see Table 3).

No significant correlations were found between disease duration and glucose metabolism in the whole group and in the two patient subgroups considered separately.

[11C]MDL100,907 Positron Emission Tomography Results

In the eight patients in the FTLD group, the binding of the tracer to 5-HT2A receptors, compared with healthy control subjects, was significantly reduced bilaterally in the ventromedial frontopolar cortex (left: -2, 58, 4; Z-score, 3.1; voxel extent, 128; right: 6, 54, 4; Z-score, 3.8; voxel extent, 128), frontal medial cortex (2, 58, 12; Z-score, 3.2; voxel extent, 128), anterior cingulate cortex (left/right: 2, 28, 32; Z-score, 3.2; voxel extent, 6), and the midbrain (left/right: 2, -14, -4; Z-score, 3.8; voxel extent, 35). The left dorsolateral frontal cortex (left: -26, 24, 52; Z-score, 3.5, voxel extent, 15) was also hypometabolic (p < 0.001; Fig 3). Results are reported in MNI spatial coordinates.

5-Hydroxytryptamine-2A (5-HT2A) receptor distribution: statistical t map of [11C]MDL100,907 binding to 5-HT2A receptors in the eight frontal variant of frontotemporal lobar degeneration patients compared with healthy control subjects. Significant receptor density reduction (p < 0.001) is shown in yellow and red. Less significant reduction (0.001 ≤ p < 0.01) is shown in green. The bar shows the correspondence of t-score values and colors.

Discussion

FTLD covers a number of different pathological conditions, which become clinically evident as behavioral disorders, semantic dementia, or progressive nonfluent aphasia.6 Early behavioral symptoms, associated with personality changes and poor social judgment, have been classified as fv-FTLD.13 Among fv-FTLD patients, a distinction has been made between apathetic and disinhibited syndromes,11 probably corresponding to the classical views of dorsolateral and orbitofrontal syndromes, respectively.12, 42 Functional neuroimaging has shown a reduction of perfusion or glucose hypometabolism in the frontal lobes, which constitutes a characteristic pattern for the frontal variety.14, 15, 43

In this study, we also show a widespread decrease of frontal metabolic activity in the whole fv-FTLD group (see Fig 1). The principal aim of this study, however, was to precisely characterize the PET functional pattern in fv-FTLD patients with mild cognitive and executive deficits, but with distinctive behavioral features, that is, the apathetic or disinhibited syndromes. When we took into account the specific behavioral presentations, significant differences in regional cerebral hypometabolism emerged. In particular, there was a prevalent reduction of glucose metabolism in frontal medial and dorsolateral frontal cortices bilaterally in apathetic patients, whereas there was significant bilateral hypometabolism in several interconnected limbic structures, such as the orbitofrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, hippocampus/amygdala, and accumbens nucleus, in the disinhibited patients. These distinctive reductions of glucose metabolism might represent the neurofunctional basis of the behavioral abnormalities seen in the two groups. In addition, the different metabolic patterns also might explain the different degrees of cognitive impairment in the apathetic and disinhibited patients.

The two groups of patients shared common hypometabolism in the ventral polar frontal cortex, which was consistent with the results of a previous 18FDG PET study in a large group of FTLD patients.15 The latter finding has been suggested to be in keeping with deficits in neuropsychological tests sensitive to ventromedial frontal function.12

Sarazin and colleagues44 reported correlations between behavioral scores and glucose hypometabolism in the frontal cortex in patients with various lesions of the prefrontal cortex. However, they did not differentiate the metabolic patterns in the so-called pseudodepressed and pseudopsychopathic patients.

The selective lateral prefrontal and frontal medial involvement in the apathetic syndrome and the prevalent hypometabolism in limbic structures in the disinhibited patients correspond to the dorsolateral and the orbitofrontal syndromes, as classically described in experimental and clinical series of focal lesions.12, 42 The syndrome associated with lesions in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is characterized by marked reduction in mental flexibility, verbal fluency, motor programming, and planning, with increased apathy and abulia. The orbital frontal syndrome is characterized by marked changes in personality, with impulsivity, disinhibition, and poor judgment.45, 46 The posterior orbital frontal region and the anterior cingulate cortex, together with the amygdala and ventral striatum, are functionally and anatomically interconnected structures and represent crucial limbic areas for emotional processing.47 This loop is necessary to retrieve emotional values to be used to control multiple behavioral responses.48 Neurodegenerative processes, causing dysfunction of this limbic system, impair the normal processing of emotional stimuli, which leads to abnormal behavioral modulation.

The reduced cerebral metabolism might result from functional and anatomical changes. Previous reports indicate that atrophy might also occur in the frontal lateral and medial frontal cortices or in the temporal lobes of FTLD patients, or in both.49 However, temporal medial and subcortical atrophy is less severe than in AD.50 Magnetic resonance imaging scans were not available for all our patients; thus, morphometric data analysis was not possible in this study. However, the majority of patients in our population had relatively mild frontal and temporal atrophy on anatomical neuroimaging. In addition, we found hypometabolism in deep cortical and subcortical structures, such as the accumbens nucleus, thalamus, and temporal medial cortex, in which there was no evidence of atrophy.

In this series of patients with a clinical diagnosis of fv-FTLD, voxel-based analysis of [11C]MDL100,907-PET binding data provided evidence for significant reductions of 5-HT2A receptor densities in the ventromedial frontopolar cortex, the frontal medial cortex, and the cingulate cortex, as well as the mesencephalon. The latter finding overlaps with postmortem studies, indicating a marked decline of midbrain neuronal number, and thus reinforcing the hypothesis of an involvement of ascending serotoninergic projections.23 These findings also suggest a role for the serotoninergic system in behavioral and cognitive disturbances associated with FTLD, because it was shown in other conditions with comparable disturbances. The serotoninergic system, particularly 5-HT2A receptors, is involved in the control of normal and pathological behaviors.51 A diffuse reduction in 5-HT2A receptor densities was reported in the dorsolateral frontal cortex of patients with unipolar major depression, extending to the temporal and occipital cortices.52, 53 Thus, this in vivo evidence in fv-FTLD of 5-HT2A receptor depletion in selected frontal medial and midbrain areas, in contrast with those previously observed in unipolar major depression, might represent another biological marker of the disease. These findings are also in agreement with preliminary positive results of the treatment by selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors of behavioral disorders in fv-FTLD patients.54 This might support a rational basis for the treatment of fv-FTLD, particularly in patients with less extensive receptor loss. Finally, highly significant but widespread cortical reductions in 5-HT2A-specific binding were demonstrated in the elderly groups relative to young control subjects.21 In conclusion, our findings confirm that the glucose metabolic pattern in the fv-FTLD is clearly different from that of AD. Moreover, the metabolic dysfunction of different frontal-limbic networks is associated with two distinct forms of fv-FTLD: the apathetic and the disinhibited syndrome. Finally, the in vivo evidence of 5-HT2A receptor depletion in frontal medial and cingulate cortices is also compatible with a role of serotoninergic dysfunction as the basis in specific behavioral and cognitive disturbances in fv-FTLD.

Acknowledgements

This study was supported by the Vth European Program for the project “Network for Standardisation and Diagnosis in Dementia” (NEST-DD).

We thank Drs A. Gavazzi and F. De Rino for patient referral and assistance and L. Bonaldi and A. Compierchio for technical assistance.

References