Differences between smokers and non-smokers in regional gray matter volumes: a voxel-based morphometry study.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies showed a link between chronic smoking and structural brain abnormalities. To date, little is known about the long-term effects of smoking on gray matter deficiencies. MRI study was carried for 44 smokers and 44 matched non-smokers to assess gray matter volume differences between the two groups. Decreased gray matter volumes were found in left thalamus, medial frontal cortex and anterior cingulate of smokers in comparison to controls. This voxel-based morphometry study is showing reduction of regional gray matter volume in smokers, which might better guide future research into the pathogenesis of chronic smoking.

INTRODUCTION

According to the report from the World Health Organization (WHO), the cumulative (lifetime) incidence of smoking in China was 53.5% (Degenhardt et al. 2008). Epidemiology study of tobacco in China (Yang et al. 2005) found that although the rate of quitting smoking was increased from 9.42% in 1996 to 11.5% in 2002, the number of ever-smoking was 66.0% for male and 3.1% for female in 2002. Converging lines of evidence have demonstrated that cigarette smoking history is a risk factor for many severe brain diseases (Roman 2005). However, few neuro-imaging studies have pointed out brain structural (regional gray matter) abnormalities in otherwise healthy chronic cigarette smokers (Brody et al. 2004; Gallinat et al. 2006).

To further investigate the effects of chronic cigarette smoking on structural brain changes, we applied whole-brain voxel-based morphometry (VBM) to quantify regional gray matter volume between 44 otherwise healthy chronic cigarette smokers and 44 matched non-smoking control subjects.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Participants

A total of 44 smokers and 44 non-smokers, 19-39 years of age were recruited from local community by advertisements. They were initially screened during a semi-structured telephone interview to assess smoking, medical, psychiatric, medication and substance use history. Smokers who had smoked 10 cigarettes per day or more during the previous year, had no period of smoking abstinence longer than three months in the past year and met DSM-IV criteria for nicotine dependence were eligible for the study. Non-smoking history was defined as having smoked no more than five cigarettes in a lifetime.

Exclusion criteria: none Han Chinese, a diagnosis of mental retardation, current alcohol or drug abuse/dependence, current or past central nervous system disease or condition, medical condition or disease with likely significant central nervous system effects, history of head injury with skull fracture or loss of consciousness of greater than 10 minutes, any current or previous psychiatric disorder, a family history of psychosis disorder, current or previous use of electroconvulsive therapy or psychotropic medications and positive pregnant test. Participants were additionally excluded for positive urine toxicology. A licensed psychiatrist at MD level conducted all the clinical interviews. The study was approved by Central South University Review Board and conformed to the guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki. The subjects were fully informed about the measurement and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning in the study. Written informed consent was given by all the subjects.

None of the participants reported daily consumption of alcohol or experiencing social consequences secondary to alcohol. All non-smokers in this sample have never had history of smoking behavior in the past.

MRI data acquisition

Brain MR images were acquired using a 3.0-Tesla Siemens scanner (Allegra; Siemens Medical System Borhn, Germany) at the Magnetic Resonance Center of Hunan Provincial People's Hospital. Foam pads were used to reduce head movements and scanner noise. Structural T1-weighted images were acquired in a sagittal orientation employing a magnetization prepared rapid gradient echo sequence with the following parameters: slice thickness = 1 mm, Gap = 0 mm, TR (repetition time) = 2000 milliseconds, TE (echo time) = 2.6 milliseconds, field of view = 256 × 256 mm, flip angle = 8°, matrix size = 256 × 256, slices = 176.

Image processing

All structural data were processed with voxel-based morphometry toolbox (VBM5.1, Christian Gaser, University of Jena, Jena, Germany) (http://dbm.neuro.uni-jena.de/vbm) with the Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM) 5 software package (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm). The VBM toolbox combines tissue segmentation, bias correction and spatial normalization into a unified model. A Hidden Markov Random Field model was used to introduce spatial constraints into the segmentation process to improve accuracy of tissue segmentation. Images were multiplied (modulated) by the Jacobian determinants from the normalization step to preserve volume information. Modulated gray matter images were smoothed with a 12 mm full width at half maximum (FWHM) Gaussian kernel for statistical analyses.

To examine differences in regional gray matter volume between groups, a voxel-wise two-sample t-test analysis in SPM5 and total gray matter volume was set as covariates. The effects of total gray matter (GM) volume were removed to allow inferences about regional differences in volume. An absolute threshold mask of 0.1 was used to avoid possible edge effects around the border between GM and white matter (WM). An initial threshold of 100 voxels (a voxel size equal to 1 mm3) or greater surviving an uncorrected threshold of P < 0.001 was set.

Statistical analyses

The statistical analyses were conducted with SPSS 15.0 software (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). Independent sample t-test and χ2 tests were used to compare demographic data between two groups. In addition, we extracted the mean volumes of the clusters that had shown differences between the between groups in VBM analysis.

RESULTS

The smoker (n = 44) and the non-smoker (n = 44) groups were selected to be matched for age (mean 28.1 ± 5.50 versus 26.3 ± 5.84), gender (18.2% versus 22.7% female, ethnicity (100% versus 100% Han Chinese), handedness (4.5% versus 2.3% left-handed) and marriage status (38.63% versus 34.09% married). More drinkers were in the smokers group than the non-smokers group (13 versus 26 drinkers). Three participants reported drinking more than once a week among the smokers group and none of the participants reported drinking more than once a week in the non-smokers group. As typically found in China, the smokers, however, had a lower education than the non-smokers (13.2 ± 2.92 versus 15.0 ± 2.6, two sample t-test P = 0.003). the smokers smoked an average of 20.3 ± 7.70 cigarettes per day and 10.4 ± 5.72 years of smoking history. The average of first smoking age was 18.0 ± 4.29.

In the VBM analysis, gray matter volume was lower in the smokers that in the non-smokers group in the left thalamus, left medial frontal cortex (Brodmann area 10) and left anterior cingulated (see Fig. 1 and Table 1). There were no regions of gray matter volume significantly higher in the smokers than in the non-smokers group.

Brain maps of representative sagittal slices showing the differences of gray matter volume between smoking group and non-smoking groupa,baVoxels of reduced gray matter volume in left thalamus, medial frontal and limbic lobe (with yellow colour), in 44 smokers revealed by SPM5 analysis.bCluster size is in voxels. All clusters shown exceed an uncorrected statistical threshold of voxel-level P < 0.001 and a cluster size threshold of 100 consecutive voxels.

DISCUSSION

The present study found that chronic cigarette smoking subjects had reduced gray matter volume in the left thalamus, left medial frontal cortex and left anterior cingulated. These results are in general concordant with previous volumetric studies finding reduced gray matter in frontal cortex and anterior cingulate (Brody et al. 2004) and in the thalamus (Gallinat et al. 2006).

Human brain imaging studies with drug-dependent subjects have shown that the disruption involves the frontal cortex, a brain region implicated in executive function behaviors (Crews & Boettiger 2009). Furthermore, the anterior cingulate is also involved in executive function behaviors, such as inhibitory control and conflict resolution (Volkow et al. 2004). The findings of smaller mean left thalamus--a brain region that has not been studied extensively in addiction context--volumes in smokers might be related to the cognitive impairment (Sharma & Brody 2009). The observation of regional gray matter volumetric decreases in chronic cigarette smokers may reflect the common neuro-circuitry of drug dependence (Koob & Volkow 2010).

The fully automated, whole-brain voxel-based morphometry methods provide a relatively unbiased tool to study the neural substrates of smoking. Our study was a replication with large sample size to previous studies. However, this study is not exactly consistent with previous studies; for example, Brody et al.'s study showed no differences of gray matter in the thalamus between smokers and controls, although previous positron emission tomography studies and our present study found alterations of activity in the thalamus among smokers (Rose et al. 2007). These inconsistencies can be partially attributed to the inclusion of small sample size and also to individual genetic vulnerability. We have to point out that the results in the present study must be interpreted with caution because it failed to survive the FDR correction.

One limitation is that education levels were not well-matched between those two groups. However, when we explicitly explored the impact of education level on gray matter differences in the smokers group, we saw no significant correlation (P > 0.38), which suggests that our findings cannot simply be explained in terms of this variable. Then, differences of alcohol consumption in those two groups would be another limitation.

In summary, the findings of this study demonstrated significant gray matter volume reduction in the left thalamus, medial frontal cortex and anterior cingulate in chronic cigarette smokers. These finding provide new insights into the pathogenesis of chronic cigarette smoking on brain structural changes and its relationship with related diseases.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by grants from the National Key Technology R&D Program in the 11th Five-Year Plan of China (2007BAI07B01), from Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC), Grant nos. 30971050, 30900486 and from National Key Basic Research and Development Program (NKBRDP) (973), Grant no. 2006CB500808, 2007CB512301, 2009CB522000.

We thank all the participants and thank Dr. Jianbin Liu, Xiaoyun Liu and Feng Huang from Magnetic Resonance Center of Hunan Provincial People's Hospital for providing expert MRI support.

Authors Contribution

YL, JT, TL, XC and WH designed the study and wrote the protocol. Authors YL and JT collected the MRI data. Authors YL, JT, TL, XC and WH collected the clinical data. Authors JT and YL undertook the MRI data analyses, and YL and JT wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All authors have critically reviewed content and approved final version submitted for publication.

References