Amygdala activity to fear and anger in healthy young males is associated with testosterone.

Neuroimaging studies have documented modulation of the activity of the amygdala - a key node in the neural network underlying emotion perception and processing, and one that has also been associated with regulating aggression - by exogenous testosterone. However, results on the impact of normal range testosterone levels on explicit emotion recognition as a prerequisite for social interaction and amygdala activation in healthy young males are missing. Hence, we performed functional MRI at 3T in a group of 21 healthy males during explicit emotion recognition with a protocol specifically optimized to reliably detect amygdala activation. We observed similar amygdala activation to all emotions presented without any effect of gender of poser or laterality. Reaction times to fearful male faces were found negatively correlated to testosterone concentration, while no significant effects emerged for other emotions and neutral expressions. Correlation analyses revealed a significant positive association between testosterone levels and amygdala response to fearful and angry facial expressions, but not to other expressions. Hence, our results demonstrate that testosterone levels affect amygdala activation and also behavioral responses particularly to threat-related emotions in healthy young males. We conclude that these findings add to our understanding of emotion processing and its modulation by neuroendocrine factors.

1. Introduction

Converging
 evidence has shown that testosterone levels are associated with basic 
social abilities, e.g., facial mimicry as one component of empathic 
behavior (Hermans et al., 2006a), mood and selective attention to angry faces (Van Honk et al., 1999), and also moderation of the reinforcing qualities of angry faces (Wirth and Schultheiss, 2007).
 While animal research has unequivocally demonstrated the connection 
between elevated testosterone levels and increased aggressiveness (e.g.,
 Lumia et al., 1994, Melloni et al., 1997) in human studies only correlational evidence has been reported (e.g., Dabbs et al., 1995, Archer, 2006).
 Regarding the possible anxiolytic effect of testosterone, this 
phenomenon has been replicated many times and in a large variety of 
animal species (e.g., Aikey et al., 2002). Although there is evidence for antidepressant effects in hypogonadal depressive patients after testosterone treatment (e.g., Wang et al., 1996), clear reductions in fear after testosterone administration or treatment have rarely been reported for humans (Van Honk et al., 2005, Hermans et al., 2006b).

The
 special role of the amygdala in the processing of threat-related 
stimuli, in particular anger and fear is well documented (e.g., Adolphs, 2002).
 Consequently, it has been argued to be strongly involved in the 
pathways controlling aggression, and most neuroimaging studies have 
consistently observed amygdala activation to angry facial expressions 
(e.g., Whalen et al., 2001).

Recently, several neuroimaging studies have shown a modulating effect of testosterone on amygdala activation: Van Wingen et al. (2008a)
 used an emotion matching task and administered a single dose of 
testosterone to middle-aged healthy females. This modulated amygdala 
activation, leading to a higher reactivity comparable with the one of 
young, healthy females. Also, applying exogenous testosterone to healthy
 young females who were presented with angry faces in a passive viewing 
task, Hermans et al. (2008) observed stronger amygdala activation in subjects to whom higher testosterone doses had been administered.

Studies
 investigating possible association of testosterone levels with explicit
 emotion recognition, another basic prerequisite for social interaction,
 and the underlying amygdala activation are totally missing. Hence, we 
investigated whether normally distributed testosterone levels in healthy
 young males exert an influence on explicit emotion recognition and 
amygdala reactivity. We performed functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) using an explicit emotion recognition paradigm in healthy young 
males. Based on previous results from our group (e.g., Habel et al., 2007, Derntl et al., 2008a),
 we hypothesized amygdala activation to all emotions presented. 
Moreover, we hypothesized a significant positive association between 
testosterone levels and amygdala reactivity in healthy males especially 
to threat-related stimuli as shown by previous fMRI studies in healthy 
females (Hermans et al., 2008, Van Wingen et al., 2008a) and behavioral data (Van Honk et al., 1999, Wirth and Schultheiss, 2007). In light of assumptions that males respond more strongly to male faces (cf. Mazurski et al., 1996), we also investigated this aspect by presenting both female and male faces.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Sample

Twenty-one right-handed healthy males aged 21-33 years (mean age 25.1 years, S.D. = 3.5) were enrolled in the study. Participants were all students (mean education 17.9 years, S.D. = 3.2)
 and were recruited by advertisements at the University of Vienna and 
the Medical University of Vienna, Austria. The study was approved by the
 ethics committee of the Medical University of Vienna and written 
informed consent was obtained from all subjects prior to the 
examination.

The 
presence of psychiatric disorders (according to DSM IV) was excluded on 
the basis of the German version of the Structured Clinical Interview for
 DSM (SCID, Wittchen et al., 1997)
 conducted by experienced clinical psychologists. The usual exclusion 
criteria for MRI were also applied and all participants had a negative 
drug screening.

All 
subjects performed above average according to norms on several 
neuropsychological tasks taken from the computerized neuropsychological 
test battery (Gur et al., 1992)
 engaging nonverbal intelligence, cognitive flexibility, visual learning
 and memory. No subject was alexithym, measured with the Toronto 
Alexithymia Scale 20 (Bagby et al., 1994). All tests were presented with an Apple MacIntosh G3 Powerbook using Powerlab software (System General, Milpitas, CA, USA).

Blood
 samples were taken on the day of fMRI measurements and only males 
without any hormone treatment were included to prevent any influences of
 external hormone administration. Assays were analyzed by the Institute 
for Laboratory Diagnostics of the Medical University of Vienna, Austria,
 using an electrochemiluminescence-immunoassay (ECLIA, Johnson et al., 1993). The intra-assay accuracy was over 90% (i.e., coefficient of variation was 4-8%) and the sensitivity of each assay was 0.2 ng/ml.

2.2. Functional tasks

We applied the same explicit emotion recognition task as described in detail elsewhere (Derntl et al., 2008a).
 Briefly, the stimulus material consisted of 72 color photographs of 
facial expressions portraying an equal number of the five basic emotions
 (anger, disgust, fear, happiness and sadness) as well as neutral 
expressions. Subjects were instructed to choose the correct emotion from
 two verbal possibilities presented on the left and right of the image, 
by pressing the corresponding button of a response box using the right 
hand. One of the options was correct and the other was selected at 
random from all other choices. Emotional facial expressions were 
presented for a maximum of 5 s with a variable interstimulus interval (ISI) ranging from 12 to 18 s
 (during which subjects viewed a scrambled face with a central 
crosshair). Responses triggered immediate progression to the next ISI. 
Stimuli were projected onto a screen and viewed by the participants via a
 mirror mounted on the head coil. The presentation of images, recording 
of responses and acquisition of scanner triggers (one per repetition 
time) was achieved using the Presentation software package 
(Neurobehavioral Systems Inc., Albany, CA, USA).

2.3. Behavioral data analysis

The
 behavioral data acquired during scanning (recognition accuracy and 
reaction time) were analyzed with repeated measures ANOVAs, with emotion
 and gender of poser as within-subjects factor. Greenhouse-Geisser 
corrected p-values were used for all ANOVAs and post hoc results were Bonferroni corrected.

To
 further analyze a possible association between testosterone levels and 
behavioral performance during scanning, correlation analyses between 
behavioral parameters and hormone level was performed across the whole 
sample, and results were corrected for multiple correlations.

2.4. FMRI acquisition parameters and data processing

Data acquisition and data processing steps are described in greater detail elsewhere (Derntl et al., 2008a). We used an echo-planar-imaging (EPI) protocol which is optimized for measuring amygdala activation at 3 Tesla (Robinson et al., 2004, Robinson et al., 2008) and has been proven to acquire robust signal from the amygdala during emotion processing (Habel et al., 2007, Moser et al., 2007, Derntl et al., 2008a). Imaging was performed with a 3 Tesla
 Medspec whole-body scanner (Bruker Biospin, Ettlingen, Germany) at the 
MR Centre of Excellence, Medical University of Vienna, Austria, using 
gradient-recalled EPI with 10 oblique axial slices centered on the 
amygdala employing asymmetric k-space sampling (FOV = 25 cm × 21 cm, matrix size 128 × 91, slice thickness 2 mm, slice gap 0.5 mm, TR = 1000 ms, TE = 31 ms).

2.4.1. Data preprocessing

Functional data were preprocessed using SPM2 (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/spm2.html).
 Images were slice timing corrected, realigned to the mean image and 
normalized into the standardized stereotactic space and functional data 
sets were spatially smoothed using an isotropic Gaussian kernel with a 
full-width-at-half-maximum of 9 mm.

For
 this event-related design, each stimulus was modelled with a separate 
regressor, based on the individual response period convolved with the 
canonical hemodynamic response function and its temporal derivative. 
Regressors of each valence were pooled to assess brain responses to each
 emotion leaving a minimum of 12 stimuli per category for statistical 
analysis. Statistical analysis was performed at the individual and group
 level. For the group analysis, contrast images from all subjects were 
included in a second level random effects analysis. Activation 
differences in brain regions covered with our protocol were examined by 
applying a two-way ANOVA with emotion and gender of poser as 
within-subject factors. For the whole slab analysis and direct 
comparisons results are presented at a threshold of p < .001 (uncorrected).

2.4.2. ROI analysis

Since
 our main hypothesis focused on the amygdala we performed a ROI analysis
 with the aim of maximizing the sensitivity to changes in amygdala 
activity and to assess possible hemispheric lateralization effects. 
Values for amygdala ROIs were extracted using a template based on the 
MNI single subject brain (Tzourio-Mazoyer et al., 2002), as defined in MRIcro (http://www.sph.sc.edu/comd/rorden/template.html). Mean parameter estimates were extracted for left and right amygdala ROI in each condition (threshold of p < .001
 uncorrected) and Levene tests for homogeneity of variances indicated 
homoscedasticity for all parameter estimates of all emotions as well as 
left and right amygdala.

A three-way ANOVA was applied with emotion, gender of poser and laterality as repeated factors. Greenhouse-Geisser corrected p-values are presented.

2.4.3. Corollary analyses

Correlation
 analysis was performed for each emotion between testosterone level and 
mean parameter estimates within the amygdala, provided by ROI analyses, 
applying Pearson correlations across all participants. Results were 
corrected for multiple correlations.

3. Results

Mean testosterone level across the whole group was 5.69 ng/ml (S.D. = 1.6), and testosterone levels of all male subjects were within the normal range for 17-50 year old healthy males (2.8-8.0 ng/ml), except for one showing 1.96 ng/ml and another subject whose testosterone level was 8.17 ng/ml.

3.1. Behavioral data

For the emotion recognition performance the repeated measures ANOVA revealed a significant emotion effect (F(3.306, 66.112) = 3.565, p = .016), with highest accuracy for happy expressions, no significant gender of poser effect (F(1, 20) = .186, p = .671) but a significant emotion-by-gender of poser interaction (F(5, 95) = 16.132, p < .001)
 was apparent. Post hoc tests decomposing this significant interaction 
revealed that male expressions of fear were significantly better 
recognized compared with the corresponding female expressions (p < .001), but for disgust (p < .001)
 female expressions were recognized more accurately than the male ones. 
For all other emotions no significant difference remained after 
Bonferroni correction (all p > .021).

Similarly, reaction times exhibited a significant emotion effect (F(5, 100) = 14.012, p < .001) with fastest reaction times for happy expressions. However, neither a significant gender of poser effect (F(1, 20) = .002, p = .964) nor emotion-by-gender of poser interaction (F(5, 100) = 1.912, p = .124) was observed. Fig. 1 illustrates recognition accuracy and reaction times across emotions and neutral expressions.

Figure 1. 
Illustration of behavioral performance during scanning showing (a) 
emotion recognition accuracy and (b) reaction times for all emotions 
across the male sample.

Correlation
 analyses after correction for multiple correlations between hormonal 
levels and behavioral performance during scanning revealed a significant
 result only for testosterone and reaction times to fearful male faces (r = -.598, p = .004).
 Even after correction for mediating effects of amygdala reaction by 
applying partial correlations this correlation remained significant (r = -.503, p = .024).

3.2. Functional data

Group
 analyses showed bilateral amygdala activation to all presented emotions
 and neutral expressions for female and male posers. Besides amygdala 
activation, responses of bilateral fusiform gyrus, inferior occipital 
and frontal gyri, inferior and medial temporal regions, hippocampus and 
parahippocampal gyrus as well as brainstem and cerebellum emerged for 
all emotions and neutral expressions across all subjects (see Fig. 2).

Figure 2. 
Results of whole-slab analysis showing activation maps of random effects
 analysis separately for female and male posers across the whole sample 
on one axial slice (Z = -18) comprising the amygdala (threshold: t = 3.55, p < .001 uncorrected).

3.2.1. ROI analysis

The ROI analysis demonstrated neither a significant emotion effect (F(3.835, 76, 699) = 2.467, p = .054), nor a significant gender of poser effect (F(1, 20) = 1.355, p = .258), or a significant laterality effect (F(1, 20) = .310, p = .584). Only the gender of poser-by-laterality interaction reached significance (F(1, 20) = 4.602, p = .044), although post hoc tests remained not significant (female vs. male left amygdala: p = .452; female vs. male right amygdala: p = .078).

Correlation
 analyses between amygdala activation to all emotions and testosterone 
levels revealed a significant positive association (r = .453, p = .039), that was also observed for all male expressions (r = .474, p = .030) but not for female expressions (r = .354, p = .116). Emotion-specific analyses showed significant results for amygdala response to fearful male (r = .683, p < .001), fearful female (r = .649, p < .001), and angry male faces (r = .662, p < .001), see Fig. 3. All other correlations did not reach significance after Bonferroni correction (all ps > .004).

Figure 3. 
Results from correlation analyses depicting significant associations 
between testosterone levels and amygdala response (mean parameter 
estimates for left and right amygdala) towards angry male faces (a), 
fearful male faces (b), and fearful female faces (c).

3.2.2. Whole slab analysis

Besides
 amygdala activation, responses of bilateral fusiform gyrus, inferior 
occipital and frontal gyri, inferior and medial temporal regions, 
hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus as well as brainstem and 
cerebellum were present for all emotions and neutral expressions across 
all subjects. Results of the ANOVA with emotion and gender of poser as 
within-subject factors revealed no significant gender of poser main 
effect, no significant emotion effect, but a significant 
emotion-by-gender of poser interaction in the parahippocampal gyrus 
bilaterally (right (MNI x, y, z): 20, -18, -16, k = 90, t = 4.08, p < .001 uncorr.; left (MNI x, y, z): -18, -22, -18, k = 33, t = 3.66, p < .001
 uncorr.). However, post hoc tests disentangling this significant 
interaction revealed no significant result for the direct comparison for
 each emotion applying the above-mentioned threshold (t = 3.55, p < .001 uncorr.).

Correlation
 analyses revealed significant associations of testosterone with 
activation of the inferior frontal gyrus only during processing of angry
 male (MNI x, y, z: -6, 24, -22; t = 3.32, k = 17, p = .002) as well as fearful male expressions (MNI x, y, z: 0, 30, -22; t = 3.83, k = 26, p = .001).

4. Discussion

We
 investigated the influence of blood testosterone levels on amygdala 
activation in healthy, young males performing an explicit emotion 
recognition task. We observed significant correlations between 
testosterone levels and amygdala reactivity only to angry male and 
fearful female and fearful male faces. These findings further highlight 
the specific association of the amygdala to threat-related stimuli, as 
has been reported by previous neuroimaging studies (see Öhman, 2005
 for review). Moreover, these results implicate a strong impact of 
testosterone levels on amygdala response in healthy males even within 
the normal range of male hormonal levels. This is the first study that 
has found significant correlations in males, while previous studies 
investigated effects of externally applied testosterone on amygdala 
activity in healthy females (e.g., Hermans et al., 2008, Van Wingen et al., 2008a, Van Wingen et al., 2008b).
 Findings from animal research indicate that testosterone acting on the 
amygdala and other subcortical sites, e.g., hypothalamus, is involved in
 aggression regulation mainly by modulation of the vasopressin receptors
 (e.g., Delville et al., 1996).

Angry
 faces are a salient cue of socially aggressive behavior and several 
studies reported significant correlations between testosterone levels 
and aggressive behavior (e.g., Archer, 2006) or responsiveness to aggressive stimuli, mostly facial expressions of anger (Wirth and Schultheiss, 2007).

In
 this study, amygdala activation during recognition of fearful faces as 
well as reaction time toward male expressions of fear was associated 
with testosterone levels. Since fearful faces are stimuli related to 
threat and danger our results support previous findings by Wirth and Schultheiss (2007),
 who demonstrated an attentional shift towards threat-related stimuli 
with increased testosterone levels. However, these findings are somewhat
 contradictory to results from animal research indicating an anxiolytic 
effect of testosterone (Aikey et al., 2002). This effect may only be observed during emotional experience of fear (Van Honk et al., 2005) and emotion regulation but not when asked to judge and respond to emotional faces quickly.

In
 their totality, our findings suggest that neural processing of 
threat-related stimuli is related to testosterone levels, which probably
 reflect more automatic, subconscious or even autonomic effects of 
testosterone, indicated by the elevated amygdala activation with 
increasing testosterone levels and the significant relation between 
hormone levels and reaction time to fearful stimuli.

Moreover,
 higher testosterone levels might also modulate attention and 
responsiveness towards particular stimuli, which is in part reflected in
 the significant negative correlation between reaction time for fearful 
faces and testosterone levels. Hence, the higher the testosterone level 
the faster the correct response, which remained significant even after 
controlling for a mediating effect of amygdala activation by applying 
partial correlations. For all other emotions no such association was 
observed. Similarly, Van Wingen et al. (2008b)
 also observed a significant impact of testosterone levels on reaction 
times, since females showed a slower response to female faces during 
elevated levels of testosterone. The authors interpreted these results 
as a possible indication that testosterone induced a shift towards more 
automatic encoding and retrieval of male faces which would be important 
for all fertile heterosexual women. Hermans et al. (2006b) reported a reduced fear-potentiated startle response in young females after testosterone administration and Van Honk et al. (2005) observed that testosterone significantly decreased the unconscious emotional response to fearful faces. Moreover, results by Wirth and Schultheiss (2007)
 suggest that testosterone decreases aversion towards threat-related 
stimuli. Considering those results, one might speculate that when 
confronted with human facial expressions, testosterone prepares females 
and males for further behavioral action by enforcing more automatic and 
autonomic processes leading to attentional shifts and decrease of 
subconscious fear thereby facilitating approach behavior, apparent in 
changes in reaction times and the significant association with amygdala 
activation, which is also strongly connected to the fight and flight 
system (Kling and Brothers, 1992).
 Moreover, recent findings from psychiatric patients also showed a 
significant association of approach and avoidance behavior with elevated
 testosterone levels in patients characterized by impulsive and 
aggressive behavior, e.g., antisocial personality disorder (Aromäki et al., 2002).

Analyses
 of the emotion recognition data revealed a significant emotion effect, 
with highest accuracy for happy faces, which has been shown in previous 
studies (e.g., Derntl et al., 2008b).
 Moreover, we observed a significant interaction of emotion and gender 
of poser: fearful male expressions and female expressions of disgust 
were better recognized than their corresponding counterparts. Regarding 
the same gender effect for fearful expressions, only one previous study 
reported better performance of male schizophrenia patients for fearful 
male expressions than fearful female expressions (Weiss et al., 2007).
 Mostly, studies addressing the impact of gender of poser on emotion 
recognition performance observed higher accuracy for female expressions 
in females and males (e.g., Hall and Matsumoto, 2004) probably due to a stronger expressivity of female posers (e.g., Kring and Gordon, 1998).

We
 did not observe an influence of testosterone levels on emotion 
recognition performance in our healthy males. This is not surprising 
given the fact that we only presented two alternatives and the 
performance of our participants was rather homogeneous. Many previous 
studies used passive viewing of emotional faces or an implicit task 
(e.g., gender discrimination) to investigate amygdala activation during 
emotional face processing. As we intended to examine the impact of 
testosterone on the role of the amygdala during 
discrimination/recognition of emotions in facial expressions we turned 
to this specific task. Even a matching task (using one emotional face as
 target and two alternative faces as responses, one depicting the same 
emotion) is not adequate for this purpose, since it does not require the
 explicit categorization of the face but rather a choice based on 
similarity. It could therefore be that the subject is not able to name 
the emotion but nevertheless finds the correct emotional face 
corresponding to the target.

Explicit
 emotion recognition tasks have rarely been applied in affective 
neuroscience but possess the opportunity to correlate behavioral 
performance (recognition accuracy and reaction time) with neural 
correlates providing new insights in the relation between neural 
activation and behavior.

Despite
 the limitations associated with using only two alternatives as response
 categories we are not aware of other practical ways to examine the 
neural correlates of this basic social ability. In our opinion response 
devices offering more than two or three possibilities in fMRI settings 
implicate other disadvantages such as a higher error response rates due 
to a lack of visual control of their responses. Furthermore, it 
introduces other confounding factors such as cognitive processes in form
 of a higher working memory load.

Several
 methodological constraints have to be considered in interpreting our 
results. Repeated testing within the same subject group would have 
enabled a more detailed analysis of fluctuations of testosterone levels 
and the influence on amygdala activation. Moreover, analysis of 
interaction effects of testosterone with cortisol would have been 
interesting, as testosterone down-regulates the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis leading to chronically decreased 
cortisol (Viau, 2002), which in turn has been linked to higher aggression in animal research (Kalin, 1999).
 We did not measure aggressiveness or current mood of subjects which 
might also influence hormone levels and thus neural activation and 
should be considered in future studies.

We
 also did not investigate the influence of gaze and used only 
expressions with direct gaze. However, several studies have reported a 
significant impact of gaze on amygdala activation in particular during 
processing of angry and fearful faces (e.g., Adams et al., 2003), thus future studies should include gaze of posers as a variable and highlight its association with testosterone levels.

In
 this study we explored the association between testosterone levels and 
amygdala activation to emotional facial expressions in healthy young men
 and relied on an optimized protocol for mapping the amygdala, thereby 
accepting restricted coverage of other regions essential for emotion 
processing, e.g., inferior frontal gyrus, insula or anterior cingulate 
cortex. Despite its key role in the neural network underlying emotional 
behavior, the amygdala is just one node and interacts with several other
 brain regions. Here, we also observed a significant correlation between
 testosterone levels and neural activation of the inferior frontal 
gyrus. Future studies using whole brain coverage might usefully assess 
the impact of hormone concentration on these sites as well as the 
functional connectivity within the emotional networks.

We
 conclude that testosterone levels affect amygdala activation and also 
behavioral responses to emotion, but particularly to threat-related 
emotions in healthy young males. Our results suggest a strong 
association between neuroendocrine status, amygdala activation and 
emotion recognition performance. This might enable a faster and deeper 
processing of angry and fear related stimuli, with possible 
evolutionarily significant behavioral effects. Our results also clearly 
demonstrate that sex hormone concentration is a relevant factor when 
investigating neural correlates of emotion processing and could help to 
explain intra- and inter-subject variability in behavioral and neural 
responses.

Role of funding sources

The
 study was supported by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF P16669-B02 to 
EM), BD was further supported by the International Research Training 
Group (IRTG1328) of the German Research Foundation (DFG), and RCG was 
supported by the National Institute of Mental Health grant MH60722. The 
FWF, the IRTG/DFG as well as the NIMH had no further role in study 
design; in the collection, analysis and interpretation of data; in the 
writing of the report; and in the decision to submit the paper for 
publication.

Conflict of interest

All authors declare NO conflict of interest.