Neural Correlates of Impaired Cognitive Control in Individuals with Methamphetamine Dependence: An fMRI Study

2. Materials and Methods 2.1. Participants A sample of 21 individuals with MA dependence and 21 healthy controls was recruited for the present study. As inclusion criteria, individuals with MA dependence must be older than 18 years and had to fulfill the criteria of the methamphetamine dependence, according to the DSM-IV criteria, which was established using the M.I.N.I. interview [ 47 ] by trained study personnel (LH). The exclusion criteria were comorbid schizophrenia and other psychotic, as well as affective disorders, neurological diseases of the central nervous system, and traumatic brain injury. Furthermore, patients, who fulfilled the criteria of other substance dependence in the last 12 months, were excluded from the study. Healthy subjects who met criteria for substance abuse or dependence or other psychiatric disorders according to DSM-IV criteria as determined by the M.I.N.I. interview or who were diagnosed with neurological disorders assessed by a checklist were excluded from the study. Impulsivity was assessed by a German version of the impulsive behavior scale, UPPS [ 46 ], exploring four dimensions of impulsivity: lack of premeditation, urgency, sensation seeking, and lack of perseverance. Three MA-dependent individuals could not complete the study due to non-adherence to the study protocol. The final sample consisted of 39 participants: 18 MA-dependent individuals (M age = 32.4, SD = 7.4, range: 18–46 years) and 21 healthy controls (M age = 27.6, SD = 3.5, range: 23–35 years). The MA group included 14 men (78%) and four women (22%) and the control group included 14 men (66.7%) and seven women (33.3%). Control subjects had a median of 12 years schooling, whereas the MA group had a median of nine years [Mann–Whitney U = 19.5, p < 0.001]. MA abusers reported MA consumption for approximately 15.3 years (SD = 6.1) on average (M g/week = 3.2, SD = 2.3), with a mean age of 17.8 years (SD = 4.0) when beginning the first MA consumption. At the time of measurement, methamphetamine abstinence existed for an average of 8.3 ± 6.4 days. The crystal meth was administrated mostly in an intranasal way and approximately on 16.9 days out of the last 30 days. Both groups reported irregular alcohol consumption with a median of 1×/week. Regarding cannabis consumption, approximately 13.8 years of consumption was reported in the MA group, whereas the control group did not report any cannabis consumption. All participants received 20 euros for the MRI screening. The local ethics committee of the Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany (# 2019-1545_1-BO) approved the study. To meet ethical requirements, prior to the study, all participants gave their informed consent. Individual data were then saved in accordance with the data protection guidelines (GDRP). 2.2. MRI Acquisition All imaging data were collected on a 3 T whole body system equipped with a 64-element head matrix coil (MAGNETOM PRISMA FIT, Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany). Firstly, a structural T1 image was acquired followed by a resting-state fMRI to investigate putatively altered functional connectivity (not reported here). Then, the Stroop test was presented in the MR scanner to measure brain activation during cognitive control. For that, a series of 220 whole-brain volume sets were acquired in one session, lasting approximately 8 min. T2*-weighted images were obtained using a multiband multislice GE-EPI sequence (TR = 2120 ms, TE = 36 ms, flip angle = 90°, multiband factor = 4) with 104 contiguous transverse slices of 1.4 mm thickness covering the entire brain and including the lower brainstem. The matrix size was 160 × 160 pixels with an in-plane resolution of 1.4 × 1.4 mm². High-resolution anatomical T1-weighted volume scans (MP-RAGE) were obtained in sagittal orientation (TR = 2.300 ms, TE = 3.03 ms, TI = 900 ms, flip angle = 9°), FOV = 256 × 256 mm², matrix 256 × 256, number of sagittal slices = 192, acceleration factor (PAT = 2) with an isotropic resolution of 1 × 1 × 1 mm³. 2.3. The Stroop Task The manual version of the Stroop test was used in the present study [ 40 ], which consisted of two conditions: a congruent (CC) and an incongruent condition (IC). In the CC, 18 color words were presented in the color denoted by the corresponding word; in the IC, 18 color words were displayed in one of three colors, which were not denoted by the word. This target stimulus was presented in the center of the display screen. Two possible answers (color words in black type) were presented to minimize contextual memory demands in the lower visual field. All subjects were instructed to indicate as fast as possible the type of color by pressing one of two buttons (with right index or middle finger), which corresponded spatially to both possible answers. Correct answers were counterbalanced on the right and left sides of the display. Stimulus presentation time was 1500 ms with an interstimulus interval of 10.5 s to allow the hemodynamic response to return to baseline. Additionally, a temporal jitter was introduced to enhance the temporal resolution. Prior to the fMRI measurement, all participants finished 4 practice trials in the scanner. The practice block was repeated until the subjects were able to do them without error. The Stroop task was implemented using presentation software (Neurobehavioral Systems Inc., Albany, California, http://nbs.neuro-bs.com/ (accessed on 15 May 2019)) running on a PC that was connected to a video projector. The Stroop stimuli were synchronized with the MR scanner and projected onto a transparent screen inside the scanner tunnel, which could be viewed by the subject through a mirror system mounted on top of the MRI head coil. The subjects’ responses were registered by an MRI-compatible fiber optic response device (Lightwave Medical Industries, Richmond, BC, Canada) with two buttons on a keypad for the right hand. This manual version of the Stroop test has been used extensively by our group producing significant and robust activation of the cognitive control network in the brain [ 40 , 41 , 45 ]. 2.4. fMRI Data Preprocessing For the preprocessing of the fMRI data, we used fMRIPrep 20.1.1, which is a preprocessing pipeline, designed to provide an easily accessible, state-of-the-art interface [ 48 ]. The functional images were slice-time corrected using 3dTshift from AFNI [ 49 ], and corrected for head-motion. There was no significant difference between the groups with respect to the framewise displacement (FD), which is an overall estimate of movement over time (HC: M FD = 0.12; CM: M FD = 0.17). Structural T1 image was adjusted for the intensity non-uniformity and the non-brain tissue was removed. Subsequently, the functional images were then co-registered to the T1 reference using bbregister (FreeSurfer), which implements boundary-based registration [ 50 ]. Then, T1 images were normalized to the MNI space by applying nonlinear registration using ANTs (version: 2.2.0). The derived transformation parameters were used to normalize the functional images and afterward spatially smoothed with the Gaussian kernel of 6 mm FWHM (full-width half-maximum) using mcflirt (FSL 5.0.9; [ 51 ]). For the statistical analysis, SPM12 software was used ( http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm (accessed on 1 December 2020)). The first four images were discarded. The data were high-pass filtered with a cutoff period of 128 s, corrected for serial correlations choosing AR(1), and analyzed voxel-wise within the general linear model to calculate the statistical parametric maps of t statistics for condition specific effects. As a first step, a fixed-effect model was performed at the single-subject level, which created images of parameter estimates used for the second-level RFX analysis. For that, we set up an ANCOVA design with a between-subjects factor group (MA vs HC), a within-subjects factor task (CC vs. IC), and age as a covariate, and tested for the postulated group differences in the Stroop task. For the whole-brain group comparisons, the statistical comparisons were thresholded on the voxel level at p < 0.001 (uncorrected) with a minimum cluster size of k ≥ 16, based on the expected voxels per cluster determined by random field theory in SPM12 software ( http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm , accessed on 1 December 2020) [ 52 ]. 2.5. Behavioral Data Analysis Behavioral data from the Stroop task were analyzed with SPSS Version 26.0 ( https://www.ibm.com/de-de/analytics/spss-statistics-software (accessed on 1 December 2020)). A two-way ANOVA was used with one between-subjects factor group (MA vs. HC), one within-subjects factor condition (CC vs. IC) for the reaction time. Group differences in the number of correct responses were analyzed non-parametrically employing the Mann–Whitney U test. 2.6. Correlational Analysis A Spearman’s rank correlational analysis was performed with the Stoop accuracy and the mean parameter estimates derived from the significant clusters in the IC contrast HC vs. MA in the left DLPFC (x = −37, y = 36, z = 18), anterior midcingulate cortex (aMCC; x = 10, y = 4, z = 32), and V1 (x = 8, y = −73, z = 16). Additionally, we correlated those parameter estimates with the duration of drug consumption, the age of starting crystal meth consumption, and the UPPS total score.

3. Results 3.1. Behavioral Performance The two-way ANOVA yielded a significant main effect of condition (F (1,37) = 24.2, p < 0.001), indicating a slower response in the IC, compared to CC (Stroop effect). However, no significant main effect of the group or group by condition interaction was detected, the same result was determined when controlling for the effect of age. The Stroop interference time (RT incongruent minus RT congruent condition) for MA abusers (M = 277.0 ms, SD = 415.6) and controls (M = 270.4 ms, SD = 273.6) was similar between groups. Both groups showed high levels of accuracy in both Stroop task conditions. In total, subjects performed significantly worse in the IC, compared to CC ( p < 0.001). Healthy controls had 98.7% correct responses in the CC (M hits = 17.8; SD = 0.4) and 91% in the IC (M hits = 16.4; SD = 1.6). MA abusers had 93.2% correct responses (M hits = 16.8; SD = 2.3) in the CC and 83.9% in the IC (M hits = 15.1; SD = 2.8). There was a significant group difference in the total number of correct responses [Mann–Whitney U = 118.0, p = 0.041], as well as for the CC [Mann–Whitney U = 121.0, p = 0.027], but not for the IC. Regarding the hypothesized altered impulsivity levels, significant differences were detected between the MA and HC groups in the UPPS subscales: urgency, lack of premeditation, and lack of perseverance ( Table 1 ), and in the total score of the UPPS scale. It showed a higher degree of self-reported impulsivity among the individuals with MA dependence. In contrast, no significant difference was found for the UPPS sensation seeking subscale. 3.2. FMRI Data 3.2.1. Group Differences in the Single Stroop Conditions Individuals with MA dependence demonstrated in the IC a significantly lower fMRI signal bilaterally in the DLPFC (BA9/46), frontal eye fields (FEF, BA8), SMA (BA 6), insula, superior (BA7), and inferior parietal cortices (BA39, BA40), thalamus, in the right aMCC (BA32), as well as in the left caudate and putamen, compared to healthy controls ( Figure 1 and Supplementary Table S1 ). In addition, we found significant and large-scale brain activation group differences in several sensory cortical regions, i.e., in the primary (V1) and secondary (V2) visual cortex, fusiform gyrus (BA37), in somatosensory (BA1, BA5) and auditory cortices (BA20, BA21, BA22). As depicted in Table 2 , clusters in the occipital cortex, right superior temporal gyrus, left DLPFC, and right insula survived the FWE correction for multiple comparisons at p < 0.05. In the CC, we observed significant, but less pronounced activation differences in the left DLPFC, right VLPFC, bilateral parietal cortex, as well as in several sensory cortical regions ( Supplementary Table S1 ). Only one cluster in the occipital cortex survived the FWE correction for multiple comparisons ( Supplementary Table S1 ). The MA group did not show any voxels with significantly higher activation, compared to the controls. No significant differences regarding brain activation were found for the group by condition interaction. 3.2.2. Group Differences in the Overall Effect of the Stroop Task Similar to group differences in the IC contrast, the MA group showed significantly lower activation in the fronto-cingulate and parietal regions and the right thalamus, compared to healthy controls during both Stroop conditions ( Supplementary Figure S1 and Table S2 ). We also found significant and large-scale brain activation differences in several sensory cortical regions, including the visual cortex, fusiform gyrus, somatosensory, and auditory cortices. Clusters in the occipital cortex, right STG, and VLPFC survived the FWE correction for multiple comparisons (see Supplementary Table S2 ). In contrast, the MA group did not show any voxels with significantly higher activation, compared to the controls. 3.3. Correlational Analysis A significantly positive correlation was detected between the total number of correct responses and the average fMRI signal in the left DLPFC (r = 0.57, p < 0.01) and aMCC (r = 0.57, p < 0.01) in the MA-dependent individuals, but not in the healthy control group ( Figure 2 ). In an exploratory analysis, the average parameter estimates from the significant cluster in V1/V2 were correlated with the number of correct responses in the Stroop task, which was not significant. No significant correlations were also detected between parameter estimates from the left DLPFC, aMCC, and V1/V2 with the duration of drug consumption, the age of starting crystal meth abuse, and the UPPS total score.

Table 1 Differences between individuals with methamphetamine dependence and healthy controls, regarding self-reported impulsivity, as assessed with the UPPS scale.

Table 2 Maxima of regions showing significantly reduced fMRI signals in individuals with crystal meth dependence, compared to healthy controls in the incongruent Stroop task condition (voxel-level p < 0.001 uncorr., cluster size ≥16, according to the expected voxels per cluster).