Structure of orbitofrontal cortex and its longitudinal course in cancer-related post-traumatic stress disorder.

The neurobiological basis of cancer-related post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) has never been studied. We investigated brain structural alterations and the longitudinal courses in patients with cancer-related PTSD. Baseline scans using magnetic resonance imaging were performed in 14 cancer survivors with PTSD, 100 without PTSD, and 70 healthy subjects. Follow-up scans were performed 2 years later in 76 cancer survivors (PTSD, n=9; non-PTSD, n=67). Using voxel-based morphometry, the gray matter volume (GMV) of the cancer survivors with PTSD was compared with the GMVs of those without PTSD and of the healthy subjects. The effects of the interactions between the diagnosis and the timing of the GMV measurements were examined. The GMV of the right orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) was significantly smaller in cancer survivors with PTSD than in those without PTSD or healthy subjects. The interaction between the diagnosis and the timing of the right OFC's GMV measurement was not significant. The OFC, which is thought to be involved in the extinction of fear conditioning and the retrieval of emotional memory, might play an important role in the pathophysiology of PTSD. Moreover, the OFC's GMV may remain constant after the development of cancer-related PTSD.

Full text access

Abstract

The neurobiological basis of cancer-related post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) has never been studied. We investigated brain structural alterations and the longitudinal courses in patients with cancer-related PTSD. Baseline scans using magnetic resonance imaging were performed in 14 cancer survivors with PTSD, 100 without PTSD, and 70 healthy subjects. Follow-up scans were performed 2 years later in 76 cancer survivors (PTSD, n

=

9; non-PTSD, n

=

67). Using voxel-based morphometry, the gray matter volume (GMV) of the cancer survivors with PTSD was compared with the GMVs of those without PTSD and of the healthy subjects. The effects of the interactions between the diagnosis and the timing of the GMV measurements were examined. The GMV of the right orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) was significantly smaller in cancer survivors with PTSD than in those without PTSD or healthy subjects. The interaction between the diagnosis and the timing of the right OFC's GMV measurement was not significant. The OFC, which is thought to be involved in the extinction of fear conditioning and the retrieval of emotional memory, might play an important role in the pathophysiology of PTSD. Moreover, the OFC's GMV may remain constant after the development of cancer-related PTSD.

Keywords

Post-traumatic stress disorder

Magnetic resonance imaging

Voxel-based morphometry

Orbitofrontal cortex

Longitudinal course

1. Introduction

Breast cancer is a major health burden for women. The incidence of breast cancer has been increasing remarkably in Japan, as in Western countries (Yoshimi and Sobue, 2004). The age-standardized incidence rate of breast cancer was reported to be 43.6% (Yoshimi and Sobue, 2004), and breast cancer is now the fifth leading cause of cancer-related deaths among Japanese women (Tsukuma et al., 2004). Breast cancer is a life-threatening illness, and receiving a diagnosis and/or a distressing anticancer treatment can be traumatic. Previous studies have reported that 3-18% of breast cancer survivors develop post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and 41% suffer from any PTSD symptom (Mehnert and Koch, 2007, Matsuoka et al., 2006, Palmer et al., 2004). PTSD symptoms have been shown to be associated with the presence of prolonged depression or anxiety (Epping-Jordan et al., 1999), psychological maladjustment (Matsuoka et al., 2002), and a poor quality of life (Cordova et al., 1995).

The neurobiological basis of cancer-related PTSD has never been studied, although that of other PTSD such as rape, war, and disaster has been extensively studied. Several previous structural neuroimaging studies on PTSD have focused on the hippocampus as the neurobiological basis of the disease and have reported a smaller gray matter volume in patients with PTSD (Kitayama et al., 2005). Moreover, a few recent studies using voxel-based morphometry (VBM) have reported a smaller gray matter volume in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), suggesting the usefulness of VBM for exploring structural alterations throughout the brain (Yamasue et al., 2003, Corbo et al., 2005, Chen et al., 2006). Findings of a smaller hippocampal or ACC gray matter volume in patients with PTSD have gradually been accumulated in cross-sectional studies. In contrast, only a few studies have longitudinally examined the influence of PTSD on the longitudinal course of the smaller gray matter volume (Bonne et al., 2001), and whether the gray matter volume decreases, increases, or remains constant under the influence of PTSD remains uncertain. On the other hand, in many functional imaging studies of PTSD using symptom provocation paradigms, the limbic system, including the hippocampus and amygdala, and the prefrontal cortex (PFC), including the ACC and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), have been found to show dysfunctional activation. Given that functional alterations have been shown to be closely associated with structural alterations (Pezawas et al., 2005), the limbic system and the PFC are likely to play roles in the neurobiological basis of cancer-related PTSD. Therefore, the limbic system and the PFC should be considered when examining the neurological basis of cancer-related PTSD. Moreover, structural alterations throughout the brain should be explored using VBM because structural differences in brain regions other than the limbic system and the PFC may exist. Further, in addition to cross-sectional investigations, a longitudinal structural examination would also be useful for revealing whether brain volumes decrease, increase, or remain constant under the influence of cancer-related PTSD.

With the hypothesis that the gray matter volume of the limbic system or the PFC is smaller in breast cancer survivors with PTSD than in those without PTSD or healthy subjects, we used VBM to explore structural alterations throughout the brains of patients with cancer-related PTSD. Any changes in gray matter volume were then examined longitudinally to investigate the influence of cancer-related PTSD on the longitudinal course of gray matter volume.

2. Methods and materials

2.1. Study design and participants

This study was approved by the institutional review board and the ethics committee of the National Cancer Center (NCC) in Tokyo, Japan. We used a database of brain MRI scans performed in breast cancer survivors; the scans were taken 3-15 months after breast cancer surgery (baseline investigation) and 2 years after the first scan (follow-up investigation). The subjects were recruited from patients regularly seen in the follow-up outpatient clinic of the Division of Breast Surgery, National Cancer Center Hospital East, between May 1998 and December 2002.

At the time of the baseline investigation, we selected the records of all the patients who had undergone breast cancer surgery, excluding those who received only a biopsy, between February 1998 and September 2001 and who survived for 3-15 months. The other inclusion criteria were (1) a female sex and (2) an age between 18 and 55 years during the recruitment periods. To minimize influences of brain atrophy and other geriatric brain changes, we included subjects who are 55-year-old or below. The exclusion criteria were (1) a history of treatment for cancer other than breast cancer or double cancer, (2) bilateral breast cancer, (3) clear evidence of residual or recurrent cancer during regular medical checkups conducted by an experienced oncologist (S.I.), (4) chemotherapy or radiation therapy within the previous month, (5) psychotropic medication within the previous month, (6) a history of any neurological disorder or traumatic brain injury accompanied by periods of unconsciousness, (7) a history of substance abuse or dependence, (8) a family history of early dementia among first- or second-degree relatives, (9) moderate physical symptoms that interfered with daily life, as assessed using the performance status defined by the Eastern Cooperative Groups (Oken et al., 1982), (10) cognitive impairment defined as a score of less than 24 on the Mini-Mental State Examination (Folstein et al., 1975, Mori et al., 1985), (11) left-handedness, and (12) the presence of a current diagnosis of major depression or PTSD other than cancer-related PTSD.

Of the 603 breast cancer patients who underwent operations between February 1998 and September 2001, 359 patients met the inclusion criteria (244 were excluded because of age). Based on their medical charts, 37 patients were excluded (double cancer: 4; bilateral cancer: 9; residual cancer: 6; recurrent cancer: 1; chemotherapy or radiation therapy within the previous month: 11; and psychotropic medication: 6). Of the remaining 322 patients, 119 refused to participate in the study and 68 could not be contacted. After an interview to screen for the exclusion criteria, 16 of the 135 patients were excluded (psychotropic medication within the previous month: 9; history of any neurological disorder or traumatic brain injury accompanied by periods of unconsciousness: 3; history of substance abuse or dependence: 1; and left-handedness: 3). Of the 119 patients who underwent MRI scans, three were excluded because of MRI acquisition errors and one was excluded because of MRI evidence of cancer metastasis in the brain. The remaining 115 patients were interviewed by a trained psychiatrist (Y.M.) using a semi-structured interview, including the clinician version of the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders (SCID) (First et al., 1997). Another psychiatrist assessed 30 of the same participants, and the κ-value for the current diagnosis of PTSD was 1.0. Definition of cancer-related PTSD was PTSD related to the patient's experience of the disclosure of cancer diagnosis and/or receiving distressing anticancer treatment. After the interview, one patient was excluded because of the presence of current non-cancer-related PTSD. Ultimately, 114 patients participated in the study. Of these 114 patients, 14 (12%) met the criteria for PTSD (current: 4 and past: 10). Of the other 100 patients, 12 (12%) have met 1 or 2 PTSD criteria of reexperience, avoidance, and hyperarousal symptoms in the past. In addition, we used advertisements or flyers in the local newspaper to recruit healthy subjects who live in the geographic area of NCC to exclude the influence of cancer itself on brain structure. The eligibility criteria were the same as those for the cancer patients, except for the requirement of a history of breast cancer surgery. Seventy healthy subjects participated in the study. After a complete description of the study was given to the subjects, written informed consent was obtained. No significant demographic differences between the breast cancer survivors with PTSD and those without PTSD or the healthy subjects were present (Table 1).

Table 1. Demographic characteristics of cancer survivors with PTSD and without PTSD or healthy subjects

Table 1. Demographic characteristics of cancer survivors with PTSD and without PTSD or healthy subjects

Comparison between breast cancer survivors with PTSD and those without PTSD.

Comparison between breast cancer survivors with PTSD and healthy subjects.

At the time of the follow-up investigation, 76 of the cancer survivors who participated in the study (9 with PTSD and 67 without PTSD) could be contacted. At this time point, all the patients with PTSD had recovered naturally without any pharmacological or psychological intervention. No significant differences in the demographics between the breast cancer survivors with PTSD and those without PTSD were observed, except for a history of major depression (PTSD, n = 7, 77.8%; non-PTSD, n = 14, 20.9%; χ2 = 12.84, p = 0.001).

2.2. Assessment of PTSD symptomatic responses to the cancer experience

To measure the PTSD symptomatic responses to the cancer experience, the Impact of Event Scale (IES), which is used worldwide to assess PTSD symptomatic responses to specific traumatic experiences, was used. The IES is a self-reported questionnaire consisting of 15 items: 7 items assessing intrusion symptoms and 8 items assessing avoidance symptoms. Each item is rated using a 4-point scale (“not at all” = 0, “rarely” = 1, “sometimes” = 3, “often” = 5) (Horowitz et al., 1979).

2.3. MRI image acquisition

The details concerning the MRI acquisition and data analysis were described in our previous study (Nakano et al., 2002, Matsuoka et al., 2003). Briefly, MRI scans were performed using a 1.5-T MRI unit (Signa Scanner; GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, Wisconsin) with three-dimensional spoiled gradient-recalled acquisition of 1.5-mm contiguous sections under the following conditions: field of view = 230 mm, matrix = 256 × 256 pixels, repetition time (TR) = 25 ms, echo time (TE) = 5 ms, and flip angle = 45°.

2.4. Data analyses

The theory and algorithm for VBM using Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM) two software (Welcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, United Kingdom) have been well documented (Ashburner and Friston, 2000). VBM was performed using an optimized method (Good et al., 2001). First, an optimized study-specific template set consisting of a T1 image and a priori gray, white, and cerebrospinal fluid images was created for the VBM analysis. This template set was constructed from brain scans taken from all the study subjects. All the scans were spatially normalized to the customized template, then smoothed with an 8-mm, full-width maximum (FWHM) smoothing kernel, followed by averaging to create a customized template. The images were then segmented into gray matter and white matter, using customized prior probability maps. These segments were then modulated to correct for volume changes occurring during spatial normalization. Finally, the images were smoothed using a 12-mm FWHM Gaussian kernel. Smoothing was performed to convert the tissue classification images into images of local gray matter density. Gray mater density, in this context, means the proportion of the smoothing kernel that was classified as gray matter. The size of this kernel specifies the spatial scale of the gray matter density changes.

For group comparisons, differences in gray matter volume at the time of the baseline investigation were compared between the cancer survivors with PTSD and those without PTSD or the healthy subjects using an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with a basic SPM2 model and age, accumulated alcohol consumption, and total gray matter volume as nuisance variables. Accumulated alcohol consumption was entered into the analysis model because alcohol consumption is known to be associated with the brain atrophy (Mukamal, 2004). Significance levels were set at a p-value of 0.05 and were corrected for multiple comparisons using the false discovery rate (FDR) approach (Genovese et al., 2002) in regions without a hypothesis. For regions with a hypothesis (amygdala, hippocampus, ACC, and OFC), significance was assumed at an uncorrected p-value of 0.001 and a k-value of 100 to suppress the possibility of small clusters arising by chance. As an additional analysis, a small volume correction (SVC) was applied to correct for multiple comparisons at the bilateral ACC and OFC by using custom-made template. As to the amygdala and hippocampus, 4-mm FWHM smoothing was performed and then the same procedure as above was followed.

We also performed a correlation analysis between regional brain volume and the IES score controlling for age, accumulated alcohol consumption, and total gray matter volume. As a value indicating the regional brain volume, the β-value of the brain area within the region of interest (ROI) was extracted using the MarsBaR ROI analysis toolbox. The ROI was set within areas that were detected to be significantly smaller in cancer survivors with PTSD than in those without PTSD at the baseline investigation. Significance levels were set at p < 0.05 (two-tailed).

Additionally, to examine the influence of cancer-related PTSD on the longitudinal course of the brain volume within the ROI, a repeated measures mixed model analysis of covariance was performed using SPSS software 14.0J (SPSS, Inc., Tokyo). TIME (baseline vs. follow-up), DIAGNOSIS (PTSD vs. non-PTSD), and TIME × DIAGNOSIS were used as effects on the brain volume within the ROI. As covariates, age, accumulated alcohol consumption, total gray matter volume at baseline, and days from baseline to follow-up were included in the analysis. Significance levels were set at p < 0.05 (two-tailed). Moreover, the repeated measures mixed model analysis of covariance was also performed using SPM2 software, following the procedure which was shown in Draganski et al., 2004, Draganski et al., 2006.

Student's t-tests or χ2 tests were used for comparisons of demographic factors to confirm homogeneity between the groups. Significance levels were set at p < 0.05 (two-tailed). The correlational analyses, t-tests and χ2 tests were performed using SPSS software 14.0J.

3. Results

3.1. Comparison of gray matter volume between breast cancer survivors with PTSD and those without PTSD or healthy subjects at the baseline investigation

The area found to have a smaller gray matter volume in breast cancer survivors with PTSD than in those without PTSD is shown in Fig. 1 {Peak coordinate [x, y, z (mm)] = (17, 48, -38), k = 295, t = 3.60, d.f. = 109, p < 0.001}, and the area found to have a smaller gray matter volume in breast cancer survivors with PTSD than in healthy subjects is shown in Fig. 2 {Peak coordinate [x, y, z (mm)] = (14, 51, -27), k = 735, t = 3.78, d.f. = 79, p < 0.001}. Both areas correspond to the right Brodmann area (BA) 11. Significant difference found in comparison between cancer survivors with PTSD and without PTSD did not survive a SVC {Peak coordinate [x, y, z (mm)] = (13, 50, -29), k = 110, t = 3.43, d.f. = 109, corrected p = 0.194}, but significant difference found in comparison between cancer survivors with PTSD and healthy subjects survived a SVC {Peak coordinate [x, y, z (mm)] = (14, 51, -27), k = 708, t = 3.78, d.f. = 79, corrected p = 0.039}. As a reference comparison between breast cancer survivors without PTSD and healthy subjects, no significantly smaller gray matter volumes were found.

Fig. 1. Smaller right BA11 gray matter volume in breast cancer survivors with PTSD, compared to survivors without PTSD. The color bar indicates the t-value.

Fig. 2. Smaller right BA11 gray matter volume in breast cancer survivors with PTSD, compared to healthy controls. The color bar indicates the t-value.

3.2. Correlation of right BA11 gray matter volume with PTSD symptomatic responses

Among the cancer survivors with PTSD (n = 14), significant negative correlations were observed between the right BA11 gray matter volume and the total IES score and the Intrusion subscale score, as shown in Table 2.

Table 2. Correlation between right BA11 gray matter volume and IES score in breast cancer survivors with PTSD (n = 14)

Table 2. Correlation between right BA11 gray matter volume and IES score in breast cancer survivors with PTSD (n = 14)

Controlling for age, accumulated alcohol consumption, and total gray matter volume. Right BA11 gray matter volume is located at {Peak coordinate [x, y, z (mm)] = (17, 48, -38), k = 295}.

3.3. Longitudinal course of right BA11 gray matter volume in breast cancer survivors with PTSD compared to the course in survivors without PTSD

The effect of the interaction between TIME (baseline vs. follow-up) and DIAGNOSIS (PTSD vs. non-PTSD) on the right BA11 gray matter volume was not significant in the analysis using SPSS software (Table 3), as well as in the analysis using SPM2 software. On the other hand, the right BA11 gray matter volume of the cancer survivors with PTSD was significantly smaller than that of cancer survivors without PTSD at both the baseline and the follow-up investigation.

Table 3. Interaction of TIME and GROUP on right BA11 gray matter volume in breast cancer survivors (n = 76)

Table 3. Interaction of TIME and GROUP on right BA11 gray matter volume in breast cancer survivors (n = 76)

TIME, baseline or follow-up; GROUP, the presence or absence of PTSD diagnosis; PTSD, n = 9; non-PTSD, n = 67.

4. Discussion

The present cross-sectional analysis revealed that the right BA11 gray matter volume of breast cancer survivors with PTSD was significantly smaller than those of breast cancer survivors without PTSD or healthy subjects and exhibited a significantly negative association with PTSD symptomatic responses to the cancer experience, particularly with intrusive responses. BA11 is included in the OFC, which is directly connected to limbic and related structures. Previous functional neuroimaging studies of patients with better understood PTSD have reported the dysfunctional activation of the OFC (Shin et al., 1999, Lanius et al., 2001, Bremner et al., 2005), while no structural neuroimaging study have reported the structural alternation of the OFC. Thus, the smaller OFC gray matter volume found in the present study might indicate a common neurobiological basis for PTSD, rather than a mechanism specific to cancer-related PTSD. However, smaller gray matter volumes in the limbic system or in PFC regions other than BA11, particularly the ACC, were not found in the present study, while previous structural neuroimaging studies have shown such changes. The discrepancies in these findings may be attributed to differences in the demographics or methodologies of the studies. As to the limbic system, including structures like the hippocampus and amygdala, our previous ROI-based volumetric studies found a smaller hippocampal and amygdalar gray matter volume in breast cancer survivors with intrusive recollection but without PTSD (Nakano et al., 2002, Matsuoka et al., 2003). Several possible explanations for these inconsistencies can be made; for example, the detection power of ROI-based volumetry might be higher than that of VBM because ROI-based volumetry performs a statistical analysis within regional brain areas, unlike VBM-which performs a statistical analysis within the global brain area. Because of this, VBM might not detect significant differences in the same brain regions as those detected by ROI-based volumetry. In addition, the breast cancer survivors in the present study had survived for 3-15 months after surgery, while those in our previous studies had survived for 3 years or more. This difference might also be relevant. As to the ACC, three previous VBM studies found smaller gray matter volumes (Yamasue et al., 2003, Corbo et al., 2005, Chen et al., 2006), although one VBM study failed to do so (Jatzko et al., 2006). The difference between the present study and these previous VBM studies might be explained by the confounder of gender; the present study included only female subjects, while previous studies included both female and male subjects. Moreover, the number of controls in our study was relatively large, while those of previous studies were relatively small. These differences might result in inconsistent findings.

The OFC, particularly on the right side, is thought to be related to the integration of affective and non-affective information and in the regulation of motivational and emotional behavior (Happaney et al., 2004). Much research has reported that the OFC is involved in the extinction of learned responses in reinforcement learning, such as fear conditioning. For example, OFC-ablated non-human primates (Butter et al., 1963) as well as human patients with OFC damage (Rolls et al., 1994) have been reported to show resistance to the extinction of fear conditioning. Moreover, a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study of healthy subjects has shown that the OFC (BA11) and amygdala were preferentially enhanced during an extinction task (Gottfried and Dolan, 2004). Furthermore, recent structural neuroimaging studies for healthy subjects have revealed that a larger OFC (BA11) gray matter volume was associated with lower skin conductance responses to a fear-conditioned stimulus during an extinction memory task (i.e., greater extinction memory) (Milad et al., 2005, Rauch et al., 2005). On the other hand, many studies have also reported that the OFC is engaged in the recall of subjective feeling states associated with past emotional experiences (Dolan, 2002). For example, in event-related fMRI studies of healthy subjects, OFC (BA11) activity has been shown to increase significantly during the recognition of an emotionally neutral stimulus learned in an emotional context, compared to those learned in a neutral context (Maratos et al., 2001, Smith et al., 2004). Similarly, an fMRI study of healthy subjects showed a significant increase in the activity of the OFC (BA11) during the recollection of emotional autobiographical memory (Piefke et al., 2003). Given these previous findings and the negative association between OFC gray matter volume and intrusive responses that as found in the present study, a smaller OFC gray matter volume might reflect the difficulty of cancer survivors with PTSD in extricating fear-conditioned emotional memories of their cancer experience; as a result, it may be easy for them to retrieve their emotional experiences frequently and repeatedly. In fact, 11-45% of breast cancer survivors have been reported to reexperience symptoms, including intrusive recollections (Matsuoka et al., 2006). Therefore, the OFC might play an important role in the pathophysiology of PTSD, particularly its intrusive symptoms.

An additional longitudinal analysis revealed that the effect of interactions between the diagnosis of cancer-related PTSD and the timing of the MRI examinations on the right BA11 gray matter volume was not significant, while the main effect of the diagnosis was significant. This result might imply that the OFC gray matter volume does not increase or decrease but remains unaltered across time after the development of cancer-related PTSD. Given that no longitudinal alterations in the right BA11 gray matter volume were observed, even though all breast cancer survivors with PTSD had naturally recovered at the time of the follow-up investigation, the smaller size seen among the patients with cancer-related PTSD might have existed before the development of the cancer-related PTSD. However, the smaller size might also have occurred as a result of scarring from the cancer-related PTSD. Future studies are required to examine the brain volume longitudinally in a larger sample both before and after the development of PTSD.

Several weaknesses of the present study should be considered when interpreting these results. First, the severity of the PTSD symptoms was unclear because the Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (Blake et al., 1995) was not used. Second, our cancer-related PTSD group included breast cancer survivors with a past diagnosis of PTSD in addition to those with a current diagnosis of PTSD. Third, 12% of cancer survivors without PTSD have had partial PTSD symptoms in the past. Forth, our follow-up sample was relatively small in size and may have been biased. Despite these weaknesses, our study also had several strengths. First, our sample was larger than that used in previous studies. Second, none of the subjects in the present study had a history of substance-related disorders and all were antidepressant-naive. Third, we prepared both a traumatized without PTSD group and a healthy subject group to compare with the traumatized with PTSD group, whereas most previous studies prepared only one of these two comparison groups.

In conclusion, the present study revealed the right OFC gray matter volume was significantly smaller in breast cancer survivors with PTSD than in those without PTSD or healthy subjects. These findings provide evidence that OFC, which is involved in the extinction of fear conditioning or the emotional retrieval of autobiographical memory, might play an important role as the neurobiological basis of PTSD, particularly its intrusive symptoms.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by grants from the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labor, and Welfare (Research on Psychiatric and Neurological Disease and Mental Health, 16190501, and Second-Term Comprehensive 10-year strategy for Cancer Control and Research). Yuko Hakamata is a Research Fellow of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science. The authors thank Haruhiko Shimoyama, PhD for his thoughtfulness and Nobue Taguchi, Yukiko Kozaki, Yuko Kojima, and Ryoko Katayama for their research assistance.

References

Voxel-based morphometry-the methods

Neuroimage, 11 (2000), pp. 805-821

D.D. Blake, F.W. Weathers, L.M. Nagy, D.G. Kaloupek, F.D. Gusman, D.S. Charney, T.M. Keane

The development of a Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale

J. Trauma Stress, 8 (1995), pp. 75-90

O. Bonne, D. Brandes, A. Gilboa, J.M. Gomori, M.E. Shenton, R.K. Pitman, A.Y. Shalev

Longitudinal MRI study of hippocampal volume in trauma survivors with PTSD

Am. J. Psychiatry, 158 (2001), pp. 1248-1251

J.D. Bremner, E. Vermetten, C. Schmahl, V. Vaccarino, M. Vythilingam, N. Afzal, C. Grillon, D.S. Charney

Positron emission tomographic imaging of neural correlates of a fear acquisition and extinction paradigm in women with childhood sexual-abuse-related post-traumatic stress disorder

Psychol. Med., 35 (2005), pp. 791-806

C.M. Butter, M. Mishkin, H.E. Rosvold

Conditioning and extinction of a food-rewarded response after selective aabalations of frontal cortex in rhesus monkeys

Exp. Neurol., 7 (1963), pp. 65-75

S. Chen, W. Xia, L. Li, J. Liu, Z. He, Z. Zhang, L. Yan, J. Zhang, D. Hu

Gray matter density reduction in the insula in fire survivors with posttraumatic stress disorder: a voxel-based morphometric study

Psychiatry Res., 146 (2006), pp. 65-72

V. Corbo, M.H. Clement, J.L. Armony, J.C. Pruessner, A. Brunet

Size versus shape differences: contrasting voxel-based and volumetric analyses of the anterior cingulate cortex in individuals with acute posttraumatic stress disorder

Biol. Psychiatry, 58 (2005), pp. 119-124

M.J. Cordova, M.A. Andrykowski, D.E. Kenady, P.C. McGrath, D.A. Sloan, W.H. Redd

Frequency and correlates of posttraumatic-stress-disorder-like symptoms after treatment for breast cancer

J. Consult. Clin. Psychol., 63 (1995), pp. 981-986

R.J. Dolan

Emotion, cognition, and behavior

Science, 298 (2002), pp. 1191-1194

B. Draganski, C. Gaser, V. Busch, G. Schuierer, U. Bogdahn, A. May

Changes in gray matter induced by training

Nature, 427 (2004), pp. 311-312

B. Draganski, C. Gaser, G. Kempermann, H.G. Kuhn, J. Winkler, C. Buchel, A. May

Temporal and spatial dynamics of brain structure changes during extensive learning

J. Neurosci., 26 (2006), pp. 6314-6317

J.E. Epping-Jordan, B.E. Compas, D.M. Osowiecki, G. Oppedisano, C. Gerhardt, K. Primo, D.N. Krag

Psychological adjustment in breast cancer: processes of emotional distress

Health Psychol., 18 (1999), pp. 315-326

M.B. First, R.L. Spitzer, M. Gibbon, J.B.W. Williams

Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders (SCID), Clinician Version

American Psychiatric Press, Washington, DC (1997)

M.F. Folstein, S.E. Folstein, P.R. McHugh

“Mini-mental state”. A practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician

J. Psychiatry. Res., 12 (1975), pp. 189-198

C.R. Genovese, N.A. Lazar, T. Nichols

Thresholding of statistical maps in functional neuroimaging using the false discovery rate

Neuroimage, 15 (2002), pp. 870-878

C.D. Good, I.S. Johnsrude, J. Ashburner, R.N. Henson, K.J. Friston, R.S. Frackowiak

A voxel-based morphometric study of ageing in 465 normal adult human brains

Neuroimage, 14 (2001), pp. 21-36

J.A. Gottfried, R.J. Dolan

Human orbitofrontal cortex mediates extinction learning while accessing conditioned representations of value

Nat. Neurosci., 7 (2004), pp. 1144-1152

K. Happaney, P.D. Zelazo, D.T. Stuss

Development of orbitofrontal function: current themes and future directions

Brain Cogn., 55 (2004), pp. 1-10

M. Horowitz, N. Wilner, W. Alvarez

Impact of Event Scale: a measure of subjective stress

Psychosom. Med., 41 (1979), pp. 209-218

A. Jatzko, S. Rothenhofer, A. Schmitt, C. Gaser, T. Demirakca, W. Weber-Fahr, M. Wessa, V. Magnotta, D.F. Braus

Hippocampal volume in chronic posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD): MRI study using two different evaluation methods

J. Affect. Disord., 94 (2006), pp. 121-126

N. Kitayama, V. Vaccarino, M. Kutner, P. Weiss, J.D. Bremner

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) measurement of hippocampal volume in posttraumatic stress disorder: a meta-analysis

J. Affect. Disord., 88 (2005), pp. 79-86

R.A. Lanius, P.C. Williamson, M. Densmore, K. Boksman, M.A. Gupta, R.W. Neufeld, J.S. Gati, R.S. Menon

Neural correlates of traumatic memories in posttraumatic stress disorder: a functional MRI investigation

Am. J. Psychiatry, 158 (2001), pp. 1920-1922

E.J. Maratos, R.J. Dolan, J.S. Morris, R.N. Henson, M.D. Rugg

Neural activity associated with episodic memory for emotional context

Neuropsychologia, 39 (2001), pp. 910-920

Y. Matsuoka, T. Nakano, M. Inagaki, Y. Sugawara, T. Akechi, S. Imoto, K. Murakami, S. Yamawaki, Y. Uchitomi

Cancer-related intrusive thoughts as an indicator of poor psychological adjustment at 3 or more years after breast surgery: a preliminary study

Breast Cancer Res. Treat., 76 (2002), pp. 117-124

Y. Matsuoka, S. Yamawaki, M. Inagaki, T. Akechi, Y. Uchitomi

A volumetric study of amygdala in cancer survivors with intrusive recollections

Biol. Psychiatry, 54 (2003), pp. 736-743

Y. Matsuoka, M. Nagamine, Y. Uchitomi

Intrusion in women with breast cancer

N. Kato, M. Kawata, R.K. Pitman (Eds.), PTSD: Brain Mechanism and Clinical Implications, Springer-Verlag, Tokyo (2006), pp. 169-178

A. Mehnert, U. Koch

Prevalence of acute and post-traumatic stress disorder and comorbid mental disorders in breast cancer patients during primary cancer care: a prospective study

Psychooncology, 16 (2007), pp. 181-188

M.R. Milad, B.T. Quinn, R.K. Pitman, S.P. Orr, B. Fischl, S.L. Rauch

Thickness of ventromedial prefrontal cortex in humans is correlated with extinction memory

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 102 (2005), pp. 10706-10711

E. Mori, Y. Mitani, A. Yamadori

Usefulness of a Japanese version of the Mini-Mental State in neurological patients

Shinkeishinrigaku, 1 (1985), pp. 82-90

K.J. Mukamal

Alcohol consumption and abnormalities of brain structure and vasculature

Am. J. Geriatr. Cardiol., 13 (2004), pp. 22-28

T. Nakano, M. Wenner, M. Inagaki, A. Kugaya, T. Akechi, Y. Matsuoka, Y. Sugahara, S. Imoto, K. Murakami, Y. Uchitomi

Relationship between distressing cancer-related recollections and hippocampal volume in cancer survivors

Am. J. Psychiatry, 159 (2002), pp. 2087-2093

M.M. Oken, R.H. Creech, D.C. Tormey, J. Horton, T.E. Davis, E.T. McFadden, P.P. Carbone

Toxicity and response criteria of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group

Am. J. Clin. Oncol., 5 (1982), pp. 649-655

S.C. Palmer, A. Kagee, J.C. Coyne, A. DeMichele

Experience of trauma, distress, and posttraumatic stress disorder among breast cancer patients

Psychosom. Med., 66 (2004), pp. 258-264

L. Pezawas, A. Meyer-Lindenberg, E.M. Drabant, B.A. Verchinski, K.E. Munoz, B.S. Kolachana, M.F. Egan, V.S. Mattay, A.R. Hariri, D.R. Weinberger

5-HTTLPR polymorphism impacts human cingulate-amygdala interactions: a genetic susceptibility mechanism for depression

Nat. Neurosci., 8 (2005), pp. 828-834

M. Piefke, P.H. Weiss, K. Zilles, H.J. Markowitsch, G.R. Fink

Differential remoteness and emotional tone modulate the neural correlates of autobiographical memory

Brain, 126 (2003), pp. 650-668

S.L. Rauch, M.R. Milad, S.P. Orr, B.T. Quinn, B. Fischl, R.K. Pitman

Orbitofrontal thickness, retention of fear extinction, and extraversion

Neuroreport, 16 (2005), pp. 1909-1912

E.T. Rolls, J. Hornak, D. Wade, J. McGrath

Emotion-related learning in patients with social and emotional changes associated with frontal lobe damage

J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry, 57 (1994), pp. 1518-1524

L.M. Shin, R.J. McNally, S.M. Kosslyn, W.L. Thompson, S.L. Rauch, N.M. Alpert, L.J. Metzger, N.B. Lasko, S.P. Orr, R.K. Pitman

Regional cerebral blood flow during script-driven imagery in childhood sexual abuse-related PTSD: a PET investigation

Am. J. Psychiatry, 156 (1999), pp. 575-584

A.P. Smith, R.N. Henson, R.J. Dolan, M. Rugg

fMRI correlates of the episodic retrieval of emotional contexts

Neuroimage, 22 (2004), pp. 868-878

H. Tsukuma, W. Ajiki, A. Oshima

Cancer incidence in Japan

Jpn. J. Cancer Chemother., 31 (2004), pp. 840-846

H. Yamasue, K. Kasai, A. Iwanami, T. Ohtani, H. Yamada, O. Abe, N. Kuroki, R. Fukuda, M. Tochigi, S. Furukawa, M. Sadamatsu, T. Sasaki, S. Aoki, K. Ohtomo, N. Asukai, N. Kato

Voxel-based analysis of MRI reveals anterior cingulate gray-matter volume reduction in posttraumatic stress disorder due to terrorism

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 100 (2003), pp. 9039-9043

I. Yoshimi, T. Sobue

Current status and trends in cancer mortality in Japan

Jpn. J. Cancer Chemother., 31 (2004), pp. 832-839

Cited by (72)

Gray matter correlates of posttraumatic stress disorder: A quantitative meta-analysis

2013, Biological Psychiatry

Similar results were reported by Chen et al. (26), who observed left medial frontal gyrus and bilateral insular reductions about 7 months after a fire accident. Hakatama et al. (27) observed gray matter reductions in right orbitofrontal cortex in female breast cancer patients in their 40s 3 to 15 months after surgery. In a study by Li et al. (28), female and male PTSD patients who experienced a fire accident in their 30s had a smaller left ACC, insular cortex, and left hippocampus.

Copyright © 2007 Elsevier Ireland Ltd and the Japan Neuroscience Society. All rights reserved.