Habenula alterations in resting state functional connectivity among autistic individuals

Methods Participants Participants for the current study were selected from the large-scale, multisite ABIDE I and II datasets. The combined ABIDE dataset consisted of neuroimaging data, as well as, demographic and phenotypic information from approximately 2,000 participants across 24 international sites. Written informed consent was obtained through institutional IRB. Further information regarding the ABIDE data collection can be found at http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/abide/abide_I.html . Demographic information was provided, including age at scan and sex, and autism spectrum disorder 2 (ASD) diagnoses were made according to the Diagnosis and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders—4th edition (DSM-IV) ( 34 ) and 5th edition (DSM-5) ( 35 ). Phenotypic Measures The phenotypic measures included in this study assessed behavioral differences commonly occurring in autism, encompassing SM, SC, EF, and DLS. SM refers to the extent to which an individual is generally motivated to engage in social-interpersonal behavior, which was measured with the 11-item Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS) Social Motivation subscale ( 36 ). SC refers to the reciprocal and expressive communication in social situations, which was measured with the 22-item SRS Social Communication subscale ( 36 ). EF refers to working memory, flexible thinking, and self-control, which was measured through the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function (BRIEF) Global Executive Composite Score (GEC) T-score ( 37 ). The BRIEF GEC T-score measures EF by compiling scores from three composite indexes that test for behavior regulation, emotional recognition, and cognitive regulation. DLS are a measure of adaptive behavior encompassing everyday tasks necessary for independent living, including personal care, household responsibilities, and community activities such as maintaining hygiene, preparing meals, and managing money and time. DLS were measured with the DLS domain of Vineland-2 nd edition ( 38 ). Neuroimaging Data Acquisition and Preprocessing Resting state, functional, and structural MRI data were acquired across the 24 scanning sites using 3T MRI scanners. For all participants, a T1-weighted structural image was collected and used for registration to Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space. Full details for acquisition parameters, informed consent, and site-specific protocols can be found at http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/abide/abide_I.html . Data were preprocessed using fMRIPrep 23.1.3, which utilizes the Brain Imaging Data Structure (BIDS) to ensure high-quality preprocessing with minimal user intervention ( 39 , 40 ). The anatomical images were intensity-corrected, skull-stripped, segmented, and spatially normalized to a standard brain template in MNI152 space. Furthermore, the preprocessed data underwent both manual and automated quality control. Using the ratings reported by independent raters for ABIDE I, we manually excluded participants that received a “fail” rating from any of the raters. We then used MRIQC 23.1.0 to inspect, flag, and remove participants, sessions, or runs ( 39 ) if they had excessive head motion defined by a framewise displacement greater than 0.35mm or had less than 100 usable time points following motion censoring ( 41 ). Lastly, denoising was performed on the remaining participants using AFNI’s 3dTproject , which utilizes a linear regression model to nuisance time series from each voxel within a dataset. Habenular Region of Interest Bilateral habenula ROIs were manually defined on the MNI’s 152-subject averaged T1 template brain (i.e., ICBM152) ( 42 , 43 ). Using Mango Image Viewer ( http://mangoviewer.com ), we followed the procedure for manual habenula delineation outlined by Lawson et al. ( 44 ). To account for habenula structural enlargement in ASD ( 27 ), as well as individual differences and deviations in registration on this probabilistic group template, the resultant ROI was dilated by 2mm in each direction. This process yielded an ROI representing an approximation of the habenula, which measured 523mm 3 in volume and was centered at MNI coordinate [0, −24, 2]. Whole-Brain Habenula Functional Connectivity Analysis Group Averaged Habenula Connectivity Participant-level functional connectivity analyses were conducted using AFNI (v22.3.05) ( 45 ). Voxelwise time series were extracted from each ROI (i.e., left and right habenula) using the unsmoothed, preprocessed, and denoised data via AFNI’s 3dmaskave . For each participant, averaged ROI time series were generated by calculating the mean voxel value for each time point across non-zero voxels respective to each region. The averaged ROI time series were entered into a general linear model to generate whole-brain correlation maps for each participant. The resulting z-transformed (Fisher r-to-z transformation) correlation maps were entered into group-level regression models with diagnosis (ASD, NT) as a categorical factor and age as a continuous factor, controlling for sex and scanning site using AFNI’s 3dLMEr ( 46 , 47 ). A group-averaged map (ASD+NT) was generated to visualize regions exhibiting positive and negative habenula connectivity for the combined ASD and NT groups. Thresholded z-maps were generated using 3dClustSim to compute a cluster size at a voxel threshold of p = 0.0001, and a cluster threshold of p = 0.01. Group Differences in Habenula Connectivity The group-averaged map was used to mask regions functionally connected with the habenula in both the ASD and NT groups. A group-difference map was generated to identify regions that exhibited atypical habenula rsFC among ASD participants (ASD vs. NT). Thresholded z-maps were generated at a voxel threshold of p = 0.0001 and a cluster threshold of p = 0.01. Age-Related Variability in Habenula Connectivity Next, a whole-brain regression analysis was performed to probe for age-related changes in habenula connectivity. Previous studies have identified substantial rsFC variability from childhood to early adulthood, characterized by a refinement of functional networks in the brain ( 48 ). Thus, we chose to focus on participants aged 5–21 years, which included the majority of ABIDE participants. Prior to testing for age-related differences, the above-described whole-brain group analysis was rerun for the age-restricted subset of participants to confirm habenula connectivity patterns remained consistent within the subsample. Next, z-transformed participant-level correlation maps were analyzed using a linear effects model to probe for age-by-group interactions, controlling for sex and scanning site. Thresholded z-maps were generated with a voxel threshold of p = 0.005 and a cluster threshold of p = 0.05. Clusters exhibiting significant age interactions in habenula connectivity between groups were identified; 5mm spherical masks were placed on the centers of peak coordinates for these clusters to extract z-scored beta coefficients. For each of the clusters, beta coefficients were averaged and entered into a linear regression model to determine the direction of developmental changes in connectivity for each group, following the approach outlined by Padmanabhan et al. (2013). Functional Decoding of Habenula Connectivity We performed functional decoding ( 49 ) on each of the thresholded z-maps to provide additional information regarding the functional role of the habenula among ASD participants. Specifically, decoding was conducted to characterize the functional role of the regions identified in each step of our analysis. To perform functional decoding, we utilized Gradec (v0.0.1rc5), a Python package designed for meta-analytic functional decoding ( 50 ). Within this package, the decoder algorithms utilize the Neurosynth database to conduct large-scale, automated synthesis of fMRI data ( 51 ). Currently, the Neurosynth has over 500,000 activation coordinates from 14,371 task-based neuroimaging studies ( 51 ). Using Gradec , we extracted Neurosynth terms that were correlated with the habenula connectivity maps and generated word clouds and radar plots to visualize the correlations between the terms and the spatial distribution of connectivity ( 50 ). Associations Between Habenula Connectivity and Autism Symptomatology Lastly, a separate regression analysis was performed to examine associations between atypical habenula connectivity and phenotypic measures, including SM, SC, EF, and DLS. Matching the approach used in the age-related regression analysis, z-scored beta coefficients were extracted from clusters showing atypical habenula connectivity using a 3mm spherical mask. Given that fewer participants had scores for each phenotypic measure, we tested clusters for significant phenotypic main effects among ASD participants, as well as phenotypic interactions between ASD and NT groups ( p < 0.05) using group as a categorical factor and age as a continuous factor, while controlling for sex and scanning site. For clusters that were identified to exhibit a significant effect, correlation coefficients were entered into a linear regression model as a function of subscore for each of the phenotypic measures. To correct for multiple comparisons, the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied to control the false discovery rate ( p < 0.05) ( 52 ).

Results Sample Selection From ABIDE participants who reported complete baseline demographic information, we excluded participants from the current study if their MRI data did not meet the previously defined inclusion criteria. The final sample included 1,584 participants (mean age: 16.26 ± 8.15 years) from the ABIDE I and II datasets, with 705 ASD participants ( Table 1 ). Among the included participants, only a fraction completed the phenotypic measures; therefore, we accessed SM and SC scores for 300 ASD and 361 NT, EF scores for 134 ASD and 201 NT, and DLS scores for 104 ASD and 68 NT. Of the included demographic variables (i.e., age, sex, handedness, diagnostic category, comorbidity, and medication status), significant differences ( p < 0.001) between the ASD and NT groups were found for sex, diagnostic category, and medication status. Whole-Brain Habenula Functional Connectivity Analysis Group-Averaged Habenula Connectivity The whole-brain, group-averaged (ASD+NT) habenula connectivity map ( Fig. 1A – B ) depicts positive and negative habenula connectivity through an extensive network of bilateral cortical and subcortical regions ( Table 2 ). Neurosynth-based functional decoding revealed that this connectivity pattern is commonly associated with terms for fear, reward, and emotion processing ( Fig. 1C ). Group Differences in Habenula Connectivity The whole-brain group-difference (ASD>NT) habenula connectivity map ( Fig. 2A – B ) depicts regions of increased habenula connectivity for the ASD group ( Table 3 ). Connectivity was observed with peaks in the auditory association and lateral temporal cortices, with comparatively weaker, yet still significant, connectivity within the primary auditory cortex and Wernicke’s area. Neurosynth-based functional decoding revealed that these regions of increased habenula connectivity among ASD participants are commonly associated with terms for speech, language, and action processing ( Fig. 2C ). No statistically significant regions of decreased ASD connectivity were observed. Age-Related Variability in Habenula Connectivity Next, we probed for age-related variability from childhood to early adulthood in habenula connectivity among participants between the ages of 5 and 21 years. Prior to conducting this analysis, we repeated computations for whole-brain group-averaged habenula connectivity in this participant subsample (i.e., without the older participants over the age of 21 years). Results yielded a similar group-averaged habenula connectivity pattern as described above, thus validating the exclusion of older participants when testing for age-related differences. The age-related variability connectivity map ( Fig. 3A – B ) depicts regions that exhibit altered developmental trajectories in habenula connectivity between the ASD and NT groups ( Table 4 ). Situated in the left anterior cerebellum, peak connectivity differences were observed in the culmen, specifically cerebral lobules IV and V, as well as in the left parahippocampus (BA 19) within the associative visual cortex and extending anteriorly through the fusiform gyrus. Extracting and entering the z-scored beta coefficients from these regions into a linear regression model revealed habenula connectivity increases across development for ASD participants, whereas NTs inversely decrease ( Fig. 3C ). Among both groups, these regional changes across development were more prominent in the culmen than the parahippocampus (BA 19). Neurosynth-based functional decoding revealed that the regions exhibiting age-related variability in habenula connectivity are commonly associated with terms related to reward, risk, and negative outcomes ( Fig. 3D ). Associations Between Habenula Connectivity and Autism Symptomatology Given the small sample sizes with completed phenotypic information, we note the following analyses were considered exploratory. Four clusters exhibited altered habenula connectivity between the ASD and NT groups ( Table 3 ); z-scored beta coefficients were extracted from these clusters and entered into a linear regression model to test for significant ( p < 0.05) main and between-group interaction effects ( Table 5 ) for each of the phenotypic measures. For SM, a significant interaction was identified in the right middle temporal gyrus (rMTG) and the left superior temporal gyrus (lSTG). Higher SM scores were associated with constant or slightly decreasing habenula connectivity in the ASD group, whereas the NT group showed increasing connectivity ( Fig. 4A ). For SC, no significant main or interaction effects were found. For EF, a significant between-group interaction effect was identified in the rSTG. Higher EF scores were associated with increasing habenula connectivity in the ASD group, whereas the NT group showed decreasing connectivity ( Fig. 4B ). For DLS, we observed a significant main effect for the ASD group, as well as a significant interaction effect in the lSTG. Higher DSL scores were associated with increasing habenula connectivity in the ASD group, whereas the NT group showed decreasing connectivity ( Fig. 4C ). However, none of these findings survived the correction for multiple comparisons.

Table 1. Participant Information.

Table 2. Peak coordinates for clusters of positive and negative group-averaged (ASD+NT) habenula connectivity, controlling for age, sex, and scanning site.

Table 3. Peak coordinates for clusters of increased habenula connectivity among ASD participants compared to neurotypical controls (ASD>NT), controlling for age, sex, and scanning site.

Table 4. Peak coordinates for clusters of regions that showed an age by group interaction, controlling for sex and scanning site.

Table 5. Group-difference (ASD>NT) main effect and interaction of phenotypic measures on habenula connectivity.